[Amit Varma]: The very fact that you're listening to my voice right now is a bloody miracle.
[Amit Varma]: When I was a kid growing up in pre-liberalization India, I would never have thought that I can
[Amit Varma]: speak into a mic in my room to someone thousands of miles away and be heard the next day by
[Amit Varma]: hundreds of thousands of people.
[Amit Varma]: What manner of wizardry is this?
[Amit Varma]: Almost every bit of technology that I use today would have seemed like magic to me in
[Amit Varma]: the 1980s.
[Amit Varma]: Hell, I remember in 1994 when I graduated from college and moved to Delhi to work in
[Amit Varma]: what was then India's largest advertising agency, there were just four computers in
[Amit Varma]: the entire floor where I worked, in a special computer room.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember marveling at the software I used once to type a script.
[Amit Varma]: Have you heard of WordStar?
[Amit Varma]: I remember moving to Bombay shortly after that, and yes, it was Bombay at that time
[Amit Varma]: and not Mumbai, and dreaming about how I would one day be rich and famous and have a laptop.
[Amit Varma]: It was so aspirational back in that time and so out of reach.
[Amit Varma]: And even the primitive garbage that was available then was way more expensive than laptops are
[Amit Varma]: today.
[Amit Varma]: I remember a friend telling me about how he had something called the internet in his office
[Amit Varma]: computer and you could type in anyone's name and it would show every web page in the world
[Amit Varma]: made on that person.
[Amit Varma]: I went to his office once, was allowed to see his computer and typed in the words Van
[Amit Varma]: Morrison.
[Amit Varma]: And my God, what a magical feeling it was to see the resultant web page when it did
[Amit Varma]: appear after about five minutes.
[Amit Varma]: Because hey, remember dial-up connections, young Indian men of my age will remember staring
[Amit Varma]: at the forehead of Samantha Fox as a dial-up connection tried to reconnect.
[Amit Varma]: You remember the sound that would make?
[Amit Varma]: But why am I talking about this now?
[Amit Varma]: It's because we normalize every technological advance as soon as it happens.
[Amit Varma]: And we have lost our sense of wonder.
[Amit Varma]: And so this is a good time to reconsider how far we have come in these years and how quickly
[Amit Varma]: our world is changing around us.
[Amit Varma]: Artificial intelligence and machine learning have already changed the way we live our lives
[Amit Varma]: and will continue to transform our post-COVID world.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, those of us who live to say 2040 will look back on 2020 and think, wow, we
[Amit Varma]: lived such primitive lives.
[Amit Varma]: We were like cave dwellers.
[Amit Varma]: I keep saying that the future is full of unknown unknowns, so we can't imagine what it will
[Amit Varma]: look like, but I'm often struck by curiosity.
[Amit Varma]: What kind of a world will my future self inhabit?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Vasant Dhar, an artificial intelligence researcher who is a professor
[Amit Varma]: at the Stern School of Business and the Center for Data Science at New York University.
[Amit Varma]: But Vasant is no mere academic.
[Amit Varma]: He worked with Morgan Stanley in the 1990s, flirted with sports analytics, and even set
[Amit Varma]: up a hedge fund called SCT Capital, which used machine learning to make its trades in
[Amit Varma]: the 1990s.
[Amit Varma]: His understanding of AI is second to none.
[Amit Varma]: He's been both a practitioner and a researcher.
[Amit Varma]: In other words, he's had skin in the game.
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, it could be argued that we all have skin in the game now, because all of
[Amit Varma]: our lives will be transformed by technology.
[Amit Varma]: And it is to explore exactly this that Vasant has started an interview podcast called Brave
[Amit Varma]: New World.
[Amit Varma]: Vasant is a host of this new show, and we'll be having conversations with a variety of
[Amit Varma]: fascinating guests, such as Scott Galloway, Richard Thaler, Eric Topol and Srinan Aral.
[Amit Varma]: It's an initiative of the Data Governance Network, and I'm actually producing the show
[Amit Varma]: for them.
[Amit Varma]: But for the first time, I'm working on a show where I am not the host.
[Amit Varma]: So I can give you the inside scoop on Brave New World.
[Amit Varma]: You are going to hear some incredible conversations on it.
[Amit Varma]: So do subscribe to it on your podcast app of choice.
[Amit Varma]: And you can also visit its website at brave new podcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: And now for our conversation.
[Amit Varma]: But first, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things I have worked on in recent years is getting my reading habit together.
[Amit Varma]: This involves making time to read books.
[Amit Varma]: But it also means reading long form articles and essays, there's a world of knowledge available
[Amit Varma]: through the internet.
[Amit Varma]: But the big question we all face is, how do I navigate this knowledge, who will be my
[Amit Varma]: guide to all the awesome writing out there?
[Amit Varma]: Well, a couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com,
[Amit Varma]: which aims to help people upgrade themselves constantly to stay relevant for the future.
[Amit Varma]: A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the daily reader.
[Amit Varma]: Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read the subjects covered
[Amit Varma]: went from machine learning to mythology to mental models, we even marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of every day, I understood the world a little better than I had the previous
[Amit Varma]: day.
[Amit Varma]: Some of the viewers of the scene in the unseen often asked me, hey, how can I build my reading
[Amit Varma]: habit and upgrade my brain?
[Amit Varma]: I have an answer for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to CTQ Compounds and check out the daily reader as well as the other activities
[Amit Varma]: that will help your future self be an upgrade on your present self.
[Amit Varma]: CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com.
[Amit Varma]: You owe this to yourself.
[Guest]: Wasn't Welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Guest]: I'm delighted to be here.
[Guest]: And thank you for having me on your show.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, it's a great pleasure for me, partly because I've also been, you know, as I announced
[Amit Varma]: in the introduction, helping you with your show Brave New World.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm so excited to listen to the future episodes of that, because it's just all such
[Amit Varma]: a fascinating field.
[Amit Varma]: But before we kind of go into the future, I want to go back into the past a little bit.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to talk about sort of your childhood, what was a young wasn't like, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: one of your talks on YouTube, you began with this beautiful picture of a bridge in Kashmir.
[Amit Varma]: And you wrote about how that's a bridge you went across when you went to school.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about sort of the young wasn't in your years, growing up, and what did you
[Guest]: want to be when you grow up?
[Guest]: You know, I have no idea.
[Guest]: But you know, there's a Jerry Garcia line, you know, what a long, strange trip it's been.
[Guest]: And that kind of characterizes my life, more or less, you know, when I just think of the
[Guest]: changes I've seen in my lifetime, that bridge you saw in my TEDx talk was actually a bridge
[Guest]: in Safa Qadal in Kashmir.
[Guest]: And, you know, as you walk across that bridge, and when that bridge was under construction,
[Guest]: you know, I used to take the boat, I was like four years old, with someone who used to take
[Guest]: me to school, who's still alive, by the way, and I meet him in Kashmir every year.
[Guest]: And you know, we reminisce about those old times, that was early 60s.
[Guest]: So that's where I got started.
[Guest]: And, you know, my father was in the army, which is why I was in Kashmir, a fair amount
[Guest]: because he was posted to hill stations, or rather, posted to forward stations, they call
[Guest]: them where families were not allowed.
[Guest]: So my mom and I spent, you know, whenever he was away, we spent some time in Kashmir.
[Guest]: And so that's where I started my childhood.
[Guest]: But I, you know, but it was all over the place, because he was in the army, I was in Wellington,
[Guest]: which is my earliest memories in life, where he was at the Defense Services Staff College.
[Guest]: And so that was actually my earliest memory in life was in Wellington in South India,
[Guest]: but we've always moving around.
[Guest]: Yeah, and, you know, and then he got posted as a military attaché to Ethiopia.
[Guest]: And so we sailed from Bombay to Yemen, and, you know, then to Ethiopia and, and that was
[Guest]: a real mind boggling experience for me.
[Guest]: And I was, you know, not even nine, I spent three years there, you know, it was really
[Guest]: formative years.
[Guest]: You know, Haile Selassie was the emperor.
[Guest]: And I used to get invited to his New Year's parties for diplomats kids.
[Guest]: So, you know, three years, I went to meet Haile Selassie, you know, and I shook hands
[Guest]: with him.
[Guest]: One of those years, another year, he did a namaste, you know, one year he shook hands.
[Guest]: And many, many years later, when I went to Jamaica, that really endeared me to the Rastafarians.
[Guest]: Because I don't know if you know this, but they follow Haile Selassie.
[Guest]: And his real name was Rastafari, which is where Rastafarian comes from, which most people
[Guest]: are not aware of.
[Guest]: Yeah, so it was that and then, you know, boarding school in India after that.
[Guest]: And by the way, when I was in Ethiopia, my mom put me in the wrong grade, she put me
[Guest]: into seventh grade instead of fourth grade, you know, I was I'd gone from third grade
[Guest]: in India, and she said, Oh, you're going to standard four.
[Guest]: And, you know, the kids there, you know, we'd gone to a party one day to the ambassador's
[Guest]: house and they told me, Oh, you know, standard four here means seventh grade, you know, tell
[Guest]: your mom that, you know, in the British schools, you know, you want to be in class two, you
[Guest]: know, so on the way back home, I told my mom, I said, By the way, you know, it's not standard
[Guest]: four, that's seventh grade, you know, and, you know, she just sort of in Kashmiri said,
[Guest]: you know, which means, you know, shut up, you little pipsqueak, you know, you think
[Guest]: you know everything.
[Guest]: And the next day, I went and took the test for seventh grade, you know, and I did really
[Guest]: poorly.
[Guest]: And the headmaster called my dad, you know, he was a very understated British guy and
[Guest]: said, you know, you show you know what you're doing, you know, and what he meant was, you
[Guest]: know, your son's like nine years old, why are you putting him in seventh grade?
[Guest]: And my dad completely missed it, right?
[Guest]: Because, you know, in his, the headmaster in his typically understated British way said,
[Guest]: you know, I think you're being a little ambitious, actually.
[Guest]: And my dad just missed that.
[Guest]: And so first day I walked into class, there were people who were like 15, you know, and,
[Guest]: you know, whistling at an attractive 19 year old English teacher, and I told my parents
[Guest]: about this.
[Guest]: And instead of being worried, they were amused.
[Guest]: They didn't actually realize it until, you know, I went to the airport with my dad to
[Guest]: collect my brother who was coming home from boarding school.
[Guest]: And there was this woman who walks by in the short skirts and heels.
[Guest]: And I walked up to her and I say, Hey, Fatima, how are you doing?
[Guest]: And she's like, Vasant, and we chatted and my dad said, Who is that woman?
[Guest]: And I said, Well, she's in my class.
[Guest]: He says, What?
[Guest]: I said, Well, what do you think I've been telling you all this time?
[Guest]: So, you know, those incidents have not been atypical.
[Guest]: So that that was my early childhood.
[Guest]: Then I went to boarding school in India, and then IIT and, you know, and then graduate
[Guest]: school after that in Pittsburgh.
[Guest]: So you know, which is where I got into AI.
[Guest]: So that, in a nutshell, has been sort of my journey.
[Guest]: So not a typical childhood, very, very unusual, but
[Amit Varma]: And kind of staying with your childhood, because now I'm curious that, did you years spent
[Amit Varma]: outside the country, you know, hobnobbing with the likes of Haile Selassie, did it mark
[Amit Varma]: you out from the other kids when you came back, like you went to boarding school at
[Amit Varma]: Lawrence School Sanhavar and all that fairly elite place at the time, but do you feel that
[Amit Varma]: you were a slightly different person, one, because, you know, that you had this experience
[Amit Varma]: of the world, which was beyond them, because those were not the kind of connected times
[Amit Varma]: that they are, where you have easy experience to other cultures and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Did that kind of make you feel that there was one layer to you, which nobody else had
[Guest]: in some ways?
[Guest]: Yes, I think there was, I'm not sure, quite sure how to describe it, right?
[Guest]: It's hard to describe these experiences that I had, both in terms of, you know, just like
[Guest]: a completely different culture.
[Guest]: And I did, you know, when you're young, you sort of immerse yourself in it so much easier.
[Guest]: And so, you know, when my parents went off to, you know, diplomat parties, I'd be hanging
[Guest]: out with the houseboy and the maid, and we'd talk in Amharic, right?
[Guest]: So I learned Amharic, the language, and then in school, I was learning French.
[Guest]: Yeah, but it was just a very unique experience.
[Guest]: So the answer is, yeah, it probably did change me in some ways.
[Guest]: Hard to describe how.
[Guest]: And then, of course, boarding school was an entirely different trip already, you know,
[Guest]: to come back in India, you know, to go from third grade to seventh grade to eighth grade
[Guest]: back to sixth grade in boarding school.
[Guest]: And finally be kind of, you know, somewhat, you know, have some sort of stability for
[Guest]: the last six or seven years of my school.
[Guest]: Before that, you know, I was in a new school every year because my father would get posted
[Guest]: to, you know, Ambala or something, and I'd, you know, go to school there.
[Guest]: So it was just, you know, constant change in my childhood, a lot of change, but very
[Guest]: interesting because it just gave me this also a wanderlust, I guess, because, you know,
[Guest]: when I was in IIT, you know, me and a friend hitchhiked from Delhi to London, you know,
[Guest]: took three months.
[Guest]: And now, you know, I last year, I just met someone at the London Business School, a faculty
[Guest]: member who had actually done it exactly the same time, the other direction, you know,
[Guest]: London to Delhi.
[Guest]: And that was a time there was a lot of movement, a lot of hippies were going back and forth
[Guest]: and these VW vans.
[Guest]: So it was a it was a great time.
[Guest]: But it gave me sort of a sense of, you know, wanting to explore, which I've continued to
[Guest]: do since then.
[Guest]: I just love to travel and be in other cultures.
[Amit Varma]: It's very refreshing.
[Amit Varma]: And I noticed when you went to IIT Bombay, you know, you passed out from IIT in 78.
[Amit Varma]: And you did a BTech in chemical engineering, which doesn't seem too connected with everything
[Amit Varma]: you've done since.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, were you just sort of following the standard routes that one does school and
[Amit Varma]: then okay, IIT is the thing to do.
[Amit Varma]: So one goes for engineering and all of that, or did you have specific ideas of your own
[Amit Varma]: at that point in time about the things that you wanted to do?
[Amit Varma]: And was there anything in your interests or your sort of hobbies at that time that presage
[Amit Varma]: the future direction of your life as it were?
[Guest]: No, not at all.
[Guest]: I was just trying to create good alternatives for myself, you know, and my parents being
[Guest]: typical Indian parents of that era said, you know, do something where you can get a job,
[Guest]: you know, that you can support yourself and you're good at math and stuff.
[Guest]: So, you know, engineering seems like the right thing.
[Guest]: So, you know, so I took, you know, Sangal's classes in South Extension.
[Guest]: So I went to IIT Delhi, by the way, you know, I took his classes and, you know, and we were
[Guest]: just so much behind the kids from the Delhi schools, you know, like Columbus and Xaviers,
[Guest]: you know, we guys have gone to boarding school.
[Guest]: We played lots of sports, you know, and, you know, my very first day in class in Sangal,
[Guest]: you know, I was just completely lost, you know, he'd say, you know, acha, sign 4A kya
[Guest]: hai, you know, and like five guys would like raise their hands and say, you know, whatever.
[Guest]: And I'd be like trying to figure out like, how do I break this, you know, sign 4A and
[Guest]: solve it.
[Guest]: So, yeah, no, there was it was nothing it was just go for the, you know, alternatives
[Guest]: in front of you, and, you know, I took the IIT exam, which, as you know, is brutal and
[Guest]: grueling, you know, stumbled my way into IIT, you know, and then applied to graduate school.
[Guest]: And then Pittsburgh is really sort of where I found myself in the graduate program.
[Guest]: That's when I learned about artificial intelligence and what it was.
[Guest]: And I'll never forget my very first exposure to AI, you know, that will remain with me.
[Guest]: I just joined a PhD program there, and a bunch of students asked me, they said, Hey, you
[Guest]: know, we want to ask this professor to offer a course in artificial intelligence, but we
[Guest]: just want to go in fourth, so he knows there's enough of us.
[Guest]: So I just said, What is AI?
[Guest]: And they said, Oh, it's when machines get intelligent.
[Guest]: And I was like, Okay, whatever.
[Guest]: And we went up to this lab in the medical school, 13th floor, top floor, and there was
[Guest]: this special decision systems lab.
[Guest]: And there was this professor, Harry Popel, who had built the first diagnostic system
[Guest]: for the entire field of internal medicine, I had no idea what that was.
[Guest]: And I had no idea that I'd be spending the next five years of my life in that lab, you
[Guest]: know, pretty much full time.
[Guest]: But, you know, we went there and asked him.
[Guest]: And he said, Oh, yeah, I'd be delighted, you know, asked us about our backgrounds.
[Guest]: And, you know, and but I remember I was standing while we were waiting for him, he was on the
[Guest]: call, there was this gigantic screen in the middle of the room, connected to a computer
[Guest]: at Stanford.
[Guest]: And there was this physician, like, completely white hair puffing a pipe.
[Guest]: And he was, quote, unquote, talking to the monitor in front of him through his assistant
[Guest]: who was typing because people those days couldn't type.
[Guest]: And the system was asking him questions about a case.
[Guest]: He was trying to solve a case.
[Guest]: And so the system asked him a few questions, he gave the answers, it asked him about blood,
[Guest]: urine, all that kind of stuff.
[Guest]: And it was engaging in a dialogue and then asked him a question like, you know, was there
[Guest]: a pain in the left lower abdomen and, you know, he said, puff, puff, why, like, why
[Guest]: you asked me the question.
[Guest]: And on the screen, you know, the computer said, well, because the evidence you've given
[Guest]: me so far is consistent with the following hypotheses.
[Guest]: And this question will help me discriminate between the top two.
[Guest]: And I was just looking at this thing like, holy smoke, like, how is a computer doing
[Guest]: this?
[Guest]: Like, how the hell is a computer behaving in this way and asking him, you know, the
[Guest]: right questions?
[Guest]: You know, and that was my first exposure.
[Guest]: And you know, I think one of the things we'll probably come back to at some point during
[Guest]: this talk is where are we now, relative to where we were then, right?
[Guest]: And I'm talking like 1979, where I was watching this dialogue happen, and the system hardly
[Guest]: ever made any mistakes.
[Guest]: It would actually diagnose virtually every case correctly, right?
[Guest]: And so that was my first exposure to AI.
[Guest]: And I said, wow, like, I don't know what this hell this thing is, but this is what I want
[Guest]: to do for the rest of my life, you know?
[Guest]: So that's what I mean by sort of found what I really wanted to do in a purpose in life
[Guest]: there, because of him and another gentleman called Herb Simon, who was a Nobel laureate
[Guest]: in economics and one of the fathers of AI.
[Guest]: So these are my two mentors in grad school, and they gave me a hell of a training and
[Guest]: just sort of taught me how to think, which I didn't really know how to do before that.
[Guest]: I didn't really know how to think, I didn't really know how to ask a question and answer
[Guest]: it, right?
[Guest]: I mean, even though I'd gone to IIT and done engineering and math and all that kind of
[Guest]: stuff, I just didn't know how to think, you know, I mean, I could solve problems, and
[Guest]: I was good analytically.
[Guest]: So I had some good tools in my back pocket, but just learning how to think about problems
[Guest]: and ask the question and just learning what inquiry is really all about scientific inquiry
[Guest]: is really all about and how to conduct it was what they exposed me to.
[Guest]: And that's been sort of the rest of my career.
[Guest]: So you know, when I started with that Jerry Garcia quote, it's, you know, you can see
[Guest]: why it's sort of been, you know, a long, strange trip indeed.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, and I'm so fascinated and delighted by that story of that moment of
[Amit Varma]: magic, when you see the computer doing what it does.
[Amit Varma]: And it just strikes me that in our own lives, and this will especially be true for young
[Amit Varma]: people today, that we are so jaded, and we take the tech around us for so much for granted
[Amit Varma]: that we probably don't have those moments of magic, those aha moments when you realize
[Amit Varma]: what the hell like I remember, you know, just speaking of myself, one sort of moment I had
[Amit Varma]: like that was actually quite recent when it reminded me also of how jaded I'd become,
[Amit Varma]: which was, you know, I'm a bit of a chess enthusiast.
[Amit Varma]: And when AlphaZero came out, and I remember looking at AlphaZero's games, and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and of course, computers in chess, of course, have been around for the longest time, Stockfish
[Amit Varma]: and all have been used for pedagogy by the top chess players forever, and have shaped
[Amit Varma]: the world of chess in very interesting ways.
[Amit Varma]: But AlphaZero was just such a step ahead.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I thought of that just now, when you spoke about how you started learning
[Amit Varma]: how to think from what you had seen and from what AI has done, because you know, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Magnus Carlsen's, the chess world champion Magnus Carlsen's coach Peter Hein
[Amit Varma]: Nelson once said that, you know, I always used to wonder what it would be like to see
[Amit Varma]: aliens with a super intelligence, play chess.
[Amit Varma]: And when I saw the AlphaZero games, I knew, and, you know, but we'll kind of come back
[Amit Varma]: to that later.
[Amit Varma]: But I want to probe a little further into what you meant when you said that you learned
[Amit Varma]: how to think, you know, can you elaborate a little bit on that?
[Amit Varma]: What do you mean by learning how to think?
[Guest]: Great question.
[Guest]: And let me see if I can do it justice, because it's one of those things where you kind of
[Guest]: know what it is, but putting it into words, it's a little challenging.
[Guest]: But it means several things.
[Guest]: First, it means developing an ability to ask a good question.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, I've been teaching for 30 plus years.
[Guest]: And very often, you know, in class, you know, someone asks a question, I say, wow, that's
[Guest]: a great question, right?
[Guest]: And, you know, like, what makes for a great question, right?
[Guest]: It's a bit of an art there, you know, but you learn to recognize it when you see it.
[Guest]: Like, I mean, some questions are just better than others, right?
[Guest]: And you know, maybe if I have some more time to think about it, I'll, you know, I may be
[Guest]: able to come up with actually a model of what makes a good question.
[Guest]: But the ability to think is firstly about how to ask the right question.
[Guest]: And then once you've asked the right question, a good question, the ability to then say,
[Guest]: well, is this answerable, right?
[Guest]: Can I actually answer this question?
[Guest]: If I had all the resources, I had all the data can actually answer this question, right?
[Guest]: And what sorts of answers do I have any expectations about what I should observe, right?
[Guest]: What do we know at the moment about this question, right?
[Guest]: So if I'm asking a question, like, what do we know about it?
[Guest]: You know, so just to go off at a bit of a tangent here, right, someone called me yesterday
[Guest]: was interested in applying to the PhD program in data science at NYU, which I had.
[Guest]: And so he wanted 20 minutes of my time.
[Guest]: So I said, you know, I said, call me.
[Guest]: And I said, so what's going on in your head?
[Guest]: He says, you know, I'm graduating, I've become fascinated by reinforcement learning because
[Guest]: of what I saw in AlphaGo, you know, which used reinforcement learning.
[Guest]: So I'm really interested in reinforcement learning, because I think there's some real
[Guest]: magic to that method.
[Guest]: And, you know, so that's what I want to explore in my PhD program.
[Guest]: And my question to him was, well, why do you think it worked so well in solving AlphaGo
[Guest]: as opposed to other methods, right?
[Guest]: Do you think other methods could have solved AlphaGo as easily, or was it something unique
[Guest]: about reinforcement learning?
[Guest]: And he says, gee, I don't know.
[Guest]: That's an interesting question.
[Guest]: And I said, but, you know, okay, and what do you think makes reinforcement learning
[Guest]: work in game playing programs, right?
[Guest]: Do you think it would work across the board, right?
[Guest]: So I said to him, I said, you know, I view data science as a canvas where rows are methods
[Guest]: and columns are domains, and the interesting questions arise at the intersections of these
[Guest]: domains and methods.
[Guest]: Reinforcement learning is a method, so look at it as a row.
[Guest]: And now game playing is a column, right?
[Guest]: Because game playing is a domain, you know, just like finance or healthcare or physics
[Guest]: or law or, you know, whatever you call it, those are all domains, right?
[Guest]: So I said, so do you think reinforcement learning would work across all of these domains equally
[Guest]: well?
[Guest]: What do you think about game playing that makes it work really well, right?
[Guest]: So when you asked me earlier, like, you know, what does it mean to learn how to think?
[Guest]: That's what I'm getting at, right?
[Guest]: Where are we right now?
[Guest]: What's the baseline?
[Guest]: What do we know about something, right?
[Guest]: And why is this a good question?
[Guest]: Why will this take us forward significantly, right?
[Guest]: Which makes it a good question.
[Guest]: And then can you actually solve the problem?
[Guest]: Do you have the data to solve it?
[Guest]: And then do you have the chops, right?
[Guest]: Do you know the tools and do you have any idea as to how long it's going to take you
[Guest]: to solve it, right?
[Guest]: So one of the things, you know, I sort of, I'm a pracademic, some people call me, you
[Guest]: know, I'm an academic, but I'm also a practical and I, you know, created, you know, an automated
[Guest]: hedge fund, you know, many years ago.
[Guest]: And so when I think of research there, my question always is like, how long will this
[Guest]: take us?
[Guest]: You know, will it take a day, two days, a week, a month, or a year?
[Guest]: If it's going to take a year, I'm not interested.
[Guest]: It's too uncertain.
[Guest]: But if it's going to take a day, I'm very interested.
[Guest]: If it's going to take a week, well, I need to think about it, right?
[Guest]: So it's all of those things that go into being a good researcher.
[Guest]: So from A to Z, asking the question to execution.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm just thinking aloud again, zooming into sort of the element of asking a good
[Amit Varma]: question, which is a great answer, by the way, would it be one quality of a good question
[Amit Varma]: that you minimize the assumptions, because it strikes me that humans are full of these
[Amit Varma]: inherent biases and their assumptions about the way the world works.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes, if those are embedded within the question that you ask, that can make the
[Amit Varma]: question less effective.
[Amit Varma]: Like, again, going back to chess, one of the things that, you know, programs like Stockfish
[Amit Varma]: and all would have embedded in them is the earlier heuristics of how you evaluate a chess
[Amit Varma]: position where, you know, material has a certain importance, space has a certain importance
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas with AlphaZero, one of the things we realized was that chess players across
[Amit Varma]: human history have been undervaluing the importance of initiative with regard to material.
[Amit Varma]: And that impression would have persisted because if you ask the questions with the wrong assumptions,
[Amit Varma]: then you don't really get those great answers.
[Amit Varma]: So again, I'm just kind of thinking aloud that would the good questions, therefore,
[Amit Varma]: be willing to take that further step back and, you know, be open to sort of learning
[Amit Varma]: that your assumptions earlier were false as well.
[Guest]: That's a great way to look at it in terms of like, how many assumptions are you making
[Guest]: in asking the question, right?
[Guest]: There's another way to look at it, which is, can I control for a bunch of things, assumptions,
[Guest]: for example, can I control for them when I answer the question, right?
[Guest]: That's the other way to think about it, right?
[Guest]: So, you know, just thinking aloud here, if I were to ask a question like, has India been
[Guest]: adversely affected by COVID because of its administrative systems?
[Guest]: Yeah, I'm just making this up, right?
[Guest]: So this is a very broad question.
[Guest]: And now, you know, you might say, well, you know, like, what kinds of assumptions will
[Guest]: you have to make in answering the question, right?
[Guest]: And you're right.
[Guest]: If I have to make all kinds of assumptions about the problem, the data and all that kind
[Guest]: of stuff, then by the time I answer the question, the answer may not have any teeth, right?
[Guest]: It may not be relevant.
[Guest]: But if I can ask like a really nice, tight question, you know, that involves few assumptions
[Guest]: and to the extent that it involves assumptions, I can control for them, then that's okay.
[Guest]: So I guess to sort of summarize my answer, I'd say, yeah, in general, you want to make
[Guest]: sure that you're not making too many assumptions, especially the wrong ones.
[Guest]: And to the extent you are, can you control for them?
[Guest]: When you answer the question.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one of the fascinating quotes that I found of yours, so I'm not going to
[Amit Varma]: quote you back to yourself, which really made me sit back and think is when you said quote,
[Amit Varma]: when you have a data driven approach to life, you find that patterns often emerge before
[Amit Varma]: reasons to stop quote, which I found sort of eye opening to me in various contexts,
[Amit Varma]: not just chess, which is what I immediately thought of, you know, and that's something
[Amit Varma]: as you pointed out came from your sort of journey examining big data that I think you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned started in 1990, when Nielsen approached you to look at some data and you found some
[Amit Varma]: unusual patterns, which you could not explain at the moment, but they were clearly patterns
[Amit Varma]: and they were clearly significant.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, before we go there, you know, take me through your journey, then through
[Amit Varma]: the 80s, where you spent five years in this lab, and, you know, what kind of work are
[Amit Varma]: you doing?
[Amit Varma]: What are the kind of problems which now interest you?
[Amit Varma]: Because I'm guessing that it is at around this point from the way you seem to describe
[Amit Varma]: it, that you have this intellectual focus that, you know, these are the kind of problems
[Amit Varma]: you want to solve.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that journey from that point on.
[Guest]: So I'm really glad you asked the question, because it actually helps to clarify how AI
[Guest]: itself has changed in the last 40 years, right?
[Guest]: So in the 80s, or rather, I should say until the 90s, AI was largely about reasoning and,
[Guest]: you know, systems that could reason from data, make inferences.
[Guest]: And I'd say that the language of AI was mostly logic, right?
[Guest]: Because with logic, you're on firm ground, right?
[Guest]: If A implies B, and you're seeing A, well, then B must be true as well, right?
[Guest]: So a lot of AI had sort of hitched itself up to logic, right?
[Guest]: And so logicians were in control of the field at that time.
[Guest]: And then people said, you know, logic isn't enough, right?
[Guest]: In fact, even my thesis advisor, right, he said, you know, deductive logic doesn't do
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And he came up with, you know, he picked up on something that a philosopher called Charles
[Guest]: Sanders Peirce had come up with called abductive logic, which is that if A implies B and you
[Guest]: observe B, it doesn't mean that A is necessarily true, but it could be, right?
[Guest]: It's like an induction now, right?
[Guest]: So now you're sort of observing things and invoking hypotheses or reasons for them, right?
[Guest]: So AI, I'd say until the 90s, and this is sort of when I got involved in AI, it was
[Guest]: all about logic.
[Guest]: It was all about representation, reasoning, inference, right?
[Guest]: That was the thing.
[Guest]: What happened around the 90s is that there was a sea change because data started becoming
[Guest]: available, right?
[Guest]: And this is, in my own career, that was becoming apparent that, wow, you know, like we can
[Guest]: actually now look towards data.
[Guest]: And at that time, it was mostly telephone companies and banks that had the data, you
[Guest]: know, other than defense and physics, like, you know, physicists have always had tons
[Guest]: of data, but other than them, which was kind of a world in itself, it was mostly telecom
[Guest]: companies and banks and companies like Nielsen, right, who were in the information business.
[Guest]: And so I saw this sort of as a new paradigm for AI that was emerging that would probably
[Guest]: eclipse the previous one.
[Guest]: And in fact, that's exactly what happened, right?
[Guest]: So in the early 90s, I sort of shifted my focus towards data and learning from data
[Guest]: and got this project with AC Nielsen, household services company, and they were tracking 50,000
[Guest]: households all over the US.
[Guest]: You know, anytime they shop, they scanned the item and went to a database and they shared
[Guest]: this data with me and said, you know, see if you can find something interesting in this,
[Guest]: you know, like we don't quite know what, but, you know, look at this data.
[Guest]: So I did.
[Guest]: And, you know, I cracked it through these algorithms I was working on at the time, you
[Guest]: know, things called genetic algorithms that would look at data and find, extract rules
[Guest]: from it.
[Guest]: So I went to this meeting and they said, so what'd you find?
[Guest]: I said, you know, I found something, but I have no idea what it means.
[Guest]: This is all right.
[Guest]: Let's take it from the top.
[Guest]: And I said, it looks like older women in the Northeast do a lot of their shopping on Thursdays.
[Guest]: And he said, Oh yeah, that's coupon day.
[Guest]: What else did you find?
[Guest]: And I was just ecstatic, you know, that I found something really interesting that made
[Guest]: sense that I hadn't really told the machine to find.
[Guest]: I just told it to look for unusual shopping activity.
[Guest]: And it said, you know, older women on Thursdays, you know, and there were many other patterns
[Guest]: like that in the data that they were completely unaware of, you know, the manager of the Neil
[Guest]: said, Oh really?
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: We didn't know that.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And so that was like, that's interesting that these patterns that are emerging and the reasons
[Guest]: they're telling me in retrospect, like, you know, that, you know, some of them were easily
[Guest]: explained like, yeah, that's coupon day, but others that weren't right.
[Guest]: And fast forward four years, right.
[Guest]: I was now in wall street, I'd taken some years off from academia and I was with a trading
[Guest]: group and I told them, I said, you know, just give me all your data and I'll tell you if
[Guest]: you could have done better.
[Guest]: And they said, well, you don't need to know anything about what we do.
[Guest]: I said, no, just give me your trades.
[Guest]: So they did.
[Guest]: And again, you know, hocus pocus, I cranked them through my genetic algorithm.
[Guest]: I come back to our weekly meeting next week on Fridays.
[Guest]: And so the head of the group said, so Vasant, what'd you find?
[Guest]: I said, I found something, but I have no idea what it means.
[Guest]: And he says, so what'd you find?
[Guest]: I said, well, you know, when the 30 day volatility is in the lowest quartile, your trades are
[Guest]: three times as profitable as they are otherwise the silence around the room for five seconds.
[Guest]: And the head researcher says, yeah, I looked at volatility.
[Guest]: And the head of the group says, Frank, you know, shut the fuck up.
[Guest]: How long have I been telling you to look at volatility?
[Guest]: And this guy who knows nothing about what we do tells us it matters.
[Guest]: And then there was like, you know, shouting and people sort of accusing each other of,
[Guest]: you know, being dumb and, you know, missing the picture.
[Guest]: And I was just watching this thing and saying, can someone tell me what's going on here?
[Guest]: And they said, no, but we've observed whenever volatility spikes, we lose a lot of money.
[Guest]: So it's interesting that you're telling us this, knowing nothing about what we do.
[Guest]: And it was six months later that I realized why I was observing what I was observing,
[Guest]: you know, because I went into the literature of finance and, you know, and, and I found
[Guest]: the reasons for what I'd found.
[Guest]: And this has happened to me pretty much in every domain I've looked at, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: I, you know, I worked with the San Antonio Spurs for a couple of seasons looking at their
[Guest]: data, you know, sports, basketball, completely different context, again, the same thing,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: But the things that pop up, you know, for example, you know, having to do with, you
[Guest]: know, the performance of a team, whether they're playing at home versus away and, you know,
[Guest]: why do they perform worse when they're away, you know, just things like that, that was
[Guest]: just in the data that you could extract and then say, wow, like, I had no idea that this
[Guest]: even existed.
[Guest]: And then finding the reasons for why those patterns exist is often a very enlightening
[Guest]: exercise, you know, reveals a lot of things about the domain that you may not have been
[Guest]: aware of.
[Guest]: And to me, this is one of the promises of data science is that it can nudge you towards
[Guest]: things that you might not even have thought of, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you talked about AlphaGo and, you know, people have said, wow, it came up with
[Guest]: these moves that we never would have thought about, right?
[Guest]: Machines look at the world differently from humans do, you know, and they often reveal
[Guest]: things that surprise us in retrospect.
[Guest]: And that's where that quote came from, which is that patterns often emerge before the reasons
[Guest]: for them become apparent.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this sort of reminds me of and this is not apropos of either AI or whatever, but
[Amit Varma]: I thought of the phrase, you know, when you spoke about looking for reasons after the
[Amit Varma]: patterns emerge, and I thought of the phrase the interpreter, which is a phrase that Michael
[Amit Varma]: Gazzaniga used when he did his famous experiments on patients of split brain epilepsy, I guess
[Amit Varma]: you've heard about that, right?
[Guest]: I have not, I'm sorry to say, but it sounds really fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, no, no.
[Amit Varma]: I'll go through it for the benefit of my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: So this really happened in, I think, the 50s or the 60s.
[Amit Varma]: And Gazzaniga recently, I think, wrote a book called human or something where he talks about
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: But this is like a seminal experiment mentioned in various books, where one of the ways of
[Amit Varma]: solving or, you know, helping to mitigate split brain epilepsy was that you cut that
[Amit Varma]: part of the corpus callosum, I think, which connects the right brain and the left brain.
[Amit Varma]: So when you sever that, they can't communicate to each other.
[Amit Varma]: So he tried this experiment with patients on whom this operation had been done, where
[Amit Varma]: you basically then divide their field of vision.
[Amit Varma]: So the right brain, of course, controls the left eye or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But essentially, you divide the field of vision, the two halves of the brain aren't talking
[Amit Varma]: to each other.
[Amit Varma]: And you show you know, what the part of the field of vision that the right brain can perceive,
[Amit Varma]: you show it something like, you know, ask for a glass of water, or say this, or go to
[Amit Varma]: the loo or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And the person would do that he would follow the instruction.
[Amit Varma]: And then he would be asked, why did you do that?
[Amit Varma]: And he would have no clue.
[Amit Varma]: So the left part of his brain would make up an explanation, which was completely unrelated.
[Amit Varma]: And it would actually believe that.
[Amit Varma]: And he called, therefore, this function in the brain, the interpreter, and reading about
[Amit Varma]: this was a sort of a aha moment for me, because then I realized that, you know, many of the
[Amit Varma]: things that we do in our lives, we think we do them for reasons, but we could be making
[Amit Varma]: them up post facto, we could be rationalizing them along the way.
[Amit Varma]: And our actual actions could be just caused by a variety of instinctual things, which
[Guest]: we are not aware of at a conscious level.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: And I mean, I'm sorry to interrupt, because there's so much I want to say on that, right?
[Guest]: Because there's at least there's at least two strands to what you've said.
[Guest]: One is, you may be convincing yourself that you found the reasons and fooling yourself,
[Guest]: which is absolutely right.
[Guest]: You know, and my sort of hypothesis is that in areas where the domain is much more well
[Guest]: defined, that's an easier problem, right?
[Guest]: So when a problem has a high degree of predictability, it has a good theory, you can actually have
[Guest]: more confidence that you've actually interpreted the pattern correctly or for the right reasons,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So that's a fascinating line of thinking.
[Guest]: And you're absolutely right that even though you're trying to now explain the reasons,
[Guest]: it's not always the case that you'll be successful or find the right reason for that, right?
[Guest]: So the other strand, and I don't know if you've read this book called My Stroke of Insight.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: Oh, you will find that fascinating.
[Guest]: It's also a TED talk.
[Guest]: That book is, you know, what I was saying is, is more interesting than the talk, because
[Guest]: it really gets into the story about this individual who's a brain scientist.
[Guest]: And she has a stroke where her left brain is impaired.
[Guest]: And so she's aware that her left brain is impaired.
[Guest]: And so it's this whole story about right brain, left brain function, right?
[Guest]: She said she felt a sense of bliss because the right brain apparently is a parallel processor
[Guest]: that just sort of takes in the information as it's coming, just streaming in blissfully.
[Guest]: And the left brain is the logical one, you know, logic, time, reasoning, you know, all
[Guest]: of that stuff, and how these, you know, two halves communicate.
[Guest]: So since you mentioned this experiment, I think you'll find this book really fascinating,
[Guest]: you know, both from sort of a scientific view and also a humanistic view, right?
[Guest]: Because she describes, you know, her many months in the hospital, you know, and just,
[Guest]: you know, and she describes this feeling when her mother came to visit her, she could not
[Guest]: recognize her mother.
[Guest]: She had no idea who this person was, but she felt a sense of warmth, you know, there was
[Guest]: something really nice, you know, that was, you know, exuding from that person in that
[Guest]: aura, right?
[Guest]: So she had the intuition, which was this right brain kind of thing, but no logic.
[Guest]: And it's a story about how she actually then learned to sort of bootstrap her left hemisphere,
[Guest]: you know, and get things back to, you know, as normal as they could be.
[Guest]: But I think you'll find that book really fascinating, and it's a great TED Talk as well, my stroke
[Amit Varma]: of insight.
[Amit Varma]: That's so fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I'm absolutely going to look it up.
[Amit Varma]: There's another larger question I saved for, you know, the last part of the show.
[Amit Varma]: But since we're on the subject, I think I might as well ask it now, which is, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: a couple of related questions.
[Amit Varma]: And one question is that, you know, the more one reads about AI, one realizes that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, our brains are also machines.
[Amit Varma]: And in some ways, they are magnificent machines.
[Amit Varma]: And in some ways, they're very flawed machines, and, you know, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So when we learn about AI, it seems to me that there are three possible phases that
[Amit Varma]: we can go through with regard to learning about AI and what AI can do with data.
[Amit Varma]: And many people possibly don't reach the third one.
[Amit Varma]: The first is, of course, excitement, that moment of magic, when you realize what it
[Amit Varma]: can do, which, you know, you described what happened to you at the lab, and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Or the first time someone, you know, from a village may see a GPS on a smartphone.
[Amit Varma]: And that can also be a moment of enormous magic, because my God, I mean, it is magical
[Amit Varma]: technology, if you think about it, you know, in the 1960s.
[Amit Varma]: And the next phase, I'm guessing would be and that I see in a lot of policy makers,
[Amit Varma]: for example, is an arrogance, because data gives them so much power, you know, having
[Amit Varma]: all these tools at their disposal, gives them so much power.
[Amit Varma]: And already as it is, you know, humans and government often suffer from what Frederick
[Amit Varma]: Hayek calls the fatal conceit.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, when you have so much these great tools at your disposal, does that then accentuate
[Amit Varma]: the arrogance, where you think that you can, you know, achieve ends, where you think you
[Amit Varma]: are superhuman, in a sense, with the help of these, whether it's in reordering society
[Amit Varma]: or in just gaming markets, or whatever it may be.
[Amit Varma]: And the third phase, I would postulate, and I'm just completely thinking aloud, and I'm
[Amit Varma]: sure much greater thinkers than me have gone through all of this.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, after excitement and arrogance, I'm thinking the third phase could well be
[Amit Varma]: humility, where you realize your own inherent limitations.
[Amit Varma]: And that sort of that veil of arrogance that makes you believe that you're something special
[Amit Varma]: in the universe, that kind of falls apart, where you realize that you are actually in
[Amit Varma]: so many ways, besides being mortal, of course, you are in so many ways, hopelessly inadequate,
[Amit Varma]: even in this one thing that we assume that we can do better than other animals.
[Guest]: There's a whole bunch of stuff in what you've just said.
[Guest]: So let me take it at two levels.
[Guest]: One is just the capabilities of AI.
[Guest]: And the second part, which you were getting at, which is, you know, what you call arrogance,
[Guest]: but it's sort of this unbridled use of data and the power that you get from doing it.
[Guest]: And what that says about how we organize society, because that's probably one of the biggest
[Guest]: questions of our time right now is, you know, the internet was supposed to be free, right?
[Guest]: It was supposed to be free, empowering, all that kind of stuff.
[Guest]: I don't know how you feel, but to me, the internet of today doesn't feel particularly
[Guest]: empowering in some ways, but very much so in others.
[Guest]: It's become a much more complicated space than it used to be, you know, 25 years ago,
[Guest]: when it was sort of in its relative infancy.
[Guest]: And we're seeing different countries adopt different models of governance, you know,
[Guest]: of data and the internet.
[Guest]: And, you know, I've described four of these, you know, being the US, Europe, India, and
[Guest]: China.
[Guest]: And we can come back to that in a little bit.
[Guest]: But that's one of the big questions of our time is, you know, how will we govern AI?
[Guest]: You know, how will we govern these platforms, which have become AI platforms, essentially,
[Guest]: because they're like very data intensive, very automated.
[Guest]: So that's one of the big questions.
[Guest]: But there's another thing you talked about, which is this sort of excitement and arrogance.
[Guest]: So, you know, I want to say one thing, which is that as excited as I am about AI and the
[Guest]: progress we've made, we're still in the Bronze Age, right?
[Guest]: These are like very early stages of AI, right?
[Guest]: Machines have gotten incredibly good, but that's relative to what they were, which is
[Guest]: incredibly stupid, right?
[Guest]: So they were stupid, they were dumb, right?
[Guest]: Now they're pretty amazing relative to our expectations, right?
[Guest]: And you talked about, you know, people have become sort of blase about all these, you
[Guest]: know, advances.
[Guest]: And it's absolutely true.
[Guest]: Like my students, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I remember the first time, you know, Watson became the Jeopardy champion, right?
[Guest]: And I asked people, I said, so what do you think of this?
[Guest]: Like, isn't that amazing?
[Guest]: And they said, yeah, it's pretty good.
[Guest]: And I was like, like, what do you mean, it's pretty good, like, you know, I said, you know,
[Guest]: expectations are just crazy, right?
[Guest]: Because to me, my expectations were, I guess, so low in retrospect, right?
[Guest]: The very first time I saw a search engine, and able to type anything in natural language,
[Guest]: I was amazed that it came up with anything remotely useful, because in my experiences
[Guest]: with natural language, you know, 20 years ago, it had been that it was just terrible.
[Guest]: Like machines had no way, they just look at keywords and try and do their best and give
[Guest]: you something and throw up their hands, right?
[Guest]: They were pretty stupid at the time, right?
[Guest]: But I was amazed that it would actually give you something useful, right?
[Guest]: Now the fact that you can talk to Alexa or Siri or whatever, it just like boggles my
[Guest]: mind, right?
[Guest]: That I never imagined I'd see this in my lifetime, you know, that we have systems that we can
[Guest]: actually talk to, and that seem to understand quote, unquote, a fair amount of what we're
[Guest]: saying, at least understand it at sufficient depth to provide a useful answer, right?
[Guest]: So that's pretty amazing, right?
[Guest]: So we've come a long ways, right?
[Guest]: But I want to come back to this, which is we're still in the Bronze Age, we've got
[Guest]: a long way to go here, you know, so I talked about, you know, that medical diagnostic system
[Guest]: that I first came across in the 79, that I thought was amazing, right?
[Guest]: It was engaging in a dialogue.
[Guest]: Now, the difference is that you can actually feed the system an X-ray image, you can feed
[Guest]: it all of this data that you're seeing as a physician, which you couldn't earlier on,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You have to look at the image, you have to see it, and then enter it into the system,
[Guest]: and then the system will quote, unquote, reason with it, right?
[Guest]: Whereas now we've gotten to the point where machines have become good at seeing things,
[Guest]: and so that gets tossed into the mix as well.
[Guest]: But are we at that point yet where machines form at, you know, function at an equivalent
[Guest]: level that human physicians do?
[Guest]: For the most part, not really, right?
[Guest]: Humans still hold that edge because of our intelligence, and humans and machines see
[Guest]: the world very differently, by the way, and we can come back to this a little bit later,
[Guest]: but we're not at that stage yet, because machines still make lots of mistakes, and this is something
[Guest]: that I've talked about a lot in my research as well, about, you know, when do we trust
[Guest]: AI systems, and my simple theory is we trust them when, you know, they don't make too many
[Guest]: mistakes and those mistakes don't have very severe consequences, right?
[Guest]: You know, to put it simply, and at the moment, we're just grappling with trying to understand
[Guest]: this in more detail, like what kinds of mistakes will driverless cars make, right?
[Guest]: Will they, you know, plow over kids routinely, you know, will they slam into poles or whatever,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You know, someone told me, a chief scientist from one of these driverless car efforts told
[Guest]: me that if you drive in driverless mode these days, you'll probably die four or five times
[Guest]: in a year, right?
[Guest]: So, we're not good enough yet in terms of driverless cars, but the larger question really
[Guest]: is in all of these domains where we apply AI, you know, whether it is medicine, healthcare,
[Guest]: or whether it's payments or, you know, whatever you can think of, the question that we always
[Guest]: have to ask ourselves is, you know, what can go wrong, and how do you really avoid catastrophes
[Guest]: from happening, right?
[Guest]: How do we really bridle the power of AI without really exposing ourselves to these huge risks
[Guest]: that these machines can subject ourselves to?
[Guest]: So, even when you talk about, you know, you mentioned data and, you know, I don't know
[Guest]: whether you mentioned Big Brother or observing society and having access to all these things,
[Guest]: you know, the question is like, what can go wrong, and are you willing to deal with the
[Guest]: consequences?
[Guest]: It reminds me of a talk by James Robinson several years ago, you know, he wrote this
[Guest]: book called Why Nations Fail, and it's all about the importance of institutions and checks
[Guest]: and balances and that, you know, societies that have more advanced institutions generally
[Guest]: tend to do better as opposed to the ones that don't, and I remember after his talk, and
[Guest]: this was in Goa, he and I went out into town and I asked him, I said, you know, are your
[Guest]: assumptions still valid in the age of AI and data?
[Guest]: Because what I see China doing blows my mind, right?
[Guest]: Maybe the assumptions you're making are assumptions of an old era where information flowed like
[Guest]: molasses and people weren't informed, and so, you know, decentralization was better
[Guest]: and let people close to the phenomenon make the decisions, right?
[Guest]: And let's have strong institutions with checks and balances, and my question to him was,
[Guest]: are we in a different era now where because there's so much data, there's so much information
[Guest]: that we can actually have very effective centralized control, and I believe that the Chinese government
[Guest]: believes that, right?
[Guest]: I think they actually believe that their leadership has the wisdom that given the power they will
[Guest]: wield it in a responsible way, right?
[Guest]: It remains to be seen what, you know, how things will look 20 years from now.
[Guest]: It'll be a really fascinating, you know, experiment, this one, as to, you know, where China is
[Guest]: 10 or 20 years from now with its very centralized model of data gathering and control and decision
[Guest]: making versus, you know, these democratic societies that are just much more freewheeling
[Guest]: and messy, right?
[Guest]: Now, we've seen that with Corona, the centralized model has actually worked better, right?
[Guest]: South Korea is my favorite example where, you know, they have two to four deaths a day,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: That's amazing statistic, right?
[Guest]: That's because there's a congruence between what the government is trying to do and what
[Guest]: individuals want, right?
[Guest]: They all want to keep deaths down and infection rates low, and so individuals are willing
[Guest]: to trust the government with this one, right?
[Guest]: But it's a really messy kind of a question, right?
[Guest]: It doesn't have an easy answer as to like, where do you really draw the line between
[Guest]: people in control saying, yeah, you know, we're responsible, trust us.
[Guest]: If we just had the right data, we do the right thing, which South Korea has done and demonstrated.
[Guest]: So it shows that it is possible for individuals and the government to work together, you know,
[Guest]: to solve a larger problem for the larger social good.
[Guest]: But how we do this, and by the way, South Korea is a democracy, right?
[Guest]: But you know, so different models, at least for COVID, have worked very differently, but
[Guest]: the larger question that you ask is a fascinating one, right?
[Guest]: Which is, how do you really find that balance between the arrogance and the capability,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: The arrogance of people in charge saying, yeah, if we have the data, we can do amazing
[Guest]: things versus them actually doing some amazing things, but doing some pretty screwed up things
[Guest]: as well, right?
[Guest]: Because they can't help it and they have access to the data and they don't have accountability,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So this is what we're dealing with, and this is what I see lawmakers dealing with in the
[Guest]: US, in Europe, in India, and I'm sure the Chinese are thinking about this as well.
[Guest]: So it's a fascinating situation which we're in, which is that the internet isn't what
[Guest]: it used to be.
[Guest]: It was freewheeling internet, but it's something that's become so powerful now that we need
[Guest]: to figure out how to govern it.
[Guest]: And the choices we make in the next few years will have a huge influence on society in these
[Guest]: various countries.
[Amit Varma]: So you've touched on many things there, and I'm going to, you know, through the course
[Amit Varma]: of this conversation, come to each of these big questions separately.
[Amit Varma]: For example, when should we trust data?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what are the dangers of AI going too far?
[Amit Varma]: What are the dangers of states going too far?
[Amit Varma]: Are we using AI for their totalitarian purposes?
[Amit Varma]: How should we govern the use of AI today?
[Amit Varma]: All these are big questions that come to them.
[Amit Varma]: But first, a sort of response or even a musing about what you said about the internet, which
[Amit Varma]: sort of also brings up a related, both an ethical question and also a question of how
[Amit Varma]: humans regard themselves, which is, you know, and I completely agree with you that the internet
[Amit Varma]: has, you know, enabled amazing progress in various ways.
[Amit Varma]: But also it has made our discourse so polarized and toxic and cause so many dangers.
[Amit Varma]: And I think part of the reason we were all sort of hopeful about the internet at one
[Amit Varma]: point in time, and I think more or less correctly, so is that we assume that it would, you know,
[Amit Varma]: enable various aspects of humanity to express themselves to their fullest.
[Amit Varma]: But that held an implicit assumption, which I think was wrong, which is that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: all of those getting expressed inevitably means a march towards virtue or a march towards
[Amit Varma]: a better world, which is not the case, because there are many aspects of human personality
[Amit Varma]: which are very ugly, for example, our tribal instincts are, you know, what we see on the
[Amit Varma]: internet today, for example, is that, especially on social media, that there is constantly
[Amit Varma]: a move towards the extremes, people form ideological echo chambers, confirmation bias kicks in
[Amit Varma]: when they look at the world around them.
[Amit Varma]: You know, dialogue has stopped, people aren't talking to each other, but past each other
[Amit Varma]: and at each other.
[Amit Varma]: And all of that, people are constantly signaling to raise their status within their own in
[Amit Varma]: groups.
[Amit Varma]: And as a consequence, everything is driven to extremism.
[Amit Varma]: And also that reality doesn't matter so much as narratives.
[Amit Varma]: And you basically pick your own narrative, and then you live in that world constructed
[Amit Varma]: in your head, and you can just get away with that.
[Amit Varma]: And there are a lot of bad consequences of that the one that I see most often in what
[Amit Varma]: I do is just how bad the political discourse has become.
[Amit Varma]: But then the ethical question that comes up, and I've had episodes in the past on this,
[Amit Varma]: as well, where I've been grappling with this issue, is that a lot of these consequences
[Amit Varma]: come from the voluntary actions of humans, that, you know, if I, for example, want to
[Amit Varma]: be in an ideological echo chamber, and I want to consume only the sort of narratives that
[Amit Varma]: satisfy me without giving a damn about whether they conform to reality or not, then the question
[Amit Varma]: that arises is that one should somebody get in the way of my voluntary choices?
[Amit Varma]: And would it be correct for them to do so?
[Amit Varma]: So that's really an ethical question.
[Amit Varma]: Because then you're telling people what is good for them, or what they should do.
[Amit Varma]: And that becomes a very paternalistic kind of approach.
[Amit Varma]: And also whether that will make a difference anyway, because now that we've been empowered
[Amit Varma]: with tools that allow us, for example, just to take one domain that allow us to believe
[Amit Varma]: whatever narrative we want about the world, we are going to do that anyway, you might
[Amit Varma]: say that no, the algorithm should give me, you know, more broad based views and news
[Amit Varma]: from across the place, but I will still believe what I want.
[Amit Varma]: So I mean, this is a bit of a rambling, but any reactions?
[Guest]: No, it's a it's a fascinating question, right?
[Guest]: What you're really touching on is, well, the internet was supposed to be free, aren't we
[Guest]: free?
[Guest]: So what if I have a bias, I should express it freely.
[Guest]: After all, I'm doing it voluntarily.
[Guest]: And I can completely see the logic for that.
[Guest]: The question you have to ask yourself is, is it voluntary, right?
[Guest]: Is your response voluntary, or is it orchestrated by an algorithm, right?
[Guest]: And the disturbing thing that I think we're seeing sufficient evidence of is that if I
[Guest]: have an AI machine, that machine has, you know, what we call an objective function,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: That machine is driven, its behavior is driven by an objective function, right?
[Guest]: So in healthcare, if I'm diagnosing cases, you know, I have a machine that's learning
[Guest]: how to diagnose cases, it's trying to minimize the errors it makes, right?
[Guest]: That's its objective function is to minimize error, right?
[Guest]: Minimize misdiagnosis.
[Guest]: So that's how it learns.
[Guest]: Now, let's take this in a social context, right?
[Guest]: Now I have an algorithm, and it's an algorithm, and I'm making money through, let's say, advertising.
[Guest]: And now I tell the algorithm, hey, just go for it, maximize my advertising revenue, you
[Guest]: figure out the best way to do it, right?
[Guest]: I'm not going to tell you, and the algorithm goes, you know, it does its hocus pocus.
[Guest]: And it realizes that, oh, people are more likely to accept friend suggestions when they
[Guest]: see that you've got more people in common with this friend that's just been suggested
[Guest]: to you by this algorithm, right?
[Guest]: And the more likely it is that you accept the invitation, the more likely it is now
[Guest]: that you're connected more densely to this cluster of people, and this more dense connection
[Guest]: increases your engagement with the platform, you now spend more time on it.
[Guest]: And now that your engagement has increased, we find that, hey, like our revenues go up
[Guest]: when people are more engaged, surprise, surprise, right?
[Guest]: Now, if you're the operator of that algorithm, what are you going to tell it to do, stop?
[Guest]: No, you've got an obligation to your shareholders, right, to maximize ad revenue.
[Guest]: Well, you're going to tell the algo, just go for it, you know, keep closing these triangles
[Guest]: all day.
[Guest]: And sure, we get echo chambers, but what the hell, that's someone else's problem, right?
[Guest]: It's almost like factories in the old days that polluted the rivers and said, yeah, we're
[Guest]: just polluting the river and polluting the air.
[Guest]: But for us, it's free.
[Guest]: It's society's problem to clean that shit up, right?
[Guest]: That's what economists called an externality that, you know, General Electric and it's,
[Guest]: you know, nuclear power, whatever, is polluting the Hudson.
[Guest]: Well, you know, and then we realized, gee, that's bad for society, we're going to fine
[Guest]: them for doing that, right?
[Guest]: So we have the EPA that comes in and says, okay, now we have Environment Protection Agency
[Guest]: because you guys are polluting the environment, right?
[Guest]: We need to protect the environment because you're polluting it, right?
[Guest]: And you're causing rates of cancer to go up, people are sick, they're dying, right?
[Guest]: We need to do something.
[Guest]: It's the same thing happening in social media, if you really think about it, right?
[Guest]: But the trouble is, we don't really understand it well enough, right?
[Guest]: We do know there's plenty of evidence to suggest that these algorithms do some nasty stuff
[Guest]: as a side effect of the fact that they're trying to maximize engagement.
[Guest]: So they're just trying, they're just doing what they've been told to do, right?
[Guest]: And they don't know that they're causing, you know, teen suicide rates to go up or things
[Guest]: like that, right?
[Guest]: So when, you know, when I talk to high school counselors, they say that they are seeing
[Guest]: increased levels of stress among teenagers, right?
[Guest]: What's causing it?
[Guest]: I don't know, right?
[Guest]: But we can't really figure these things out unless we have some data to be able to measure
[Guest]: these things and be able to correlate them with what's going on in society, such as social
[Guest]: media platforms.
[Guest]: At the moment, we don't have this data.
[Guest]: So the jury's out.
[Guest]: But this is the kind of stuff we need to be thinking about, which is, are these things
[Guest]: really voluntary or are you just being a tool that the algo is kind of, you know, playing
[Guest]: around with and the algo is not being evil.
[Guest]: It's just doing its thing in accordance with its objective function, but it's creating
[Guest]: a mess as a side effect of what it's doing.
[Guest]: And that's what we're seeing emerging these days.
[Guest]: And that's why you have all this concern and lawmakers, you know, both Democrats and Republicans
[Guest]: accusing social media platforms of being biased, of spreading misinformation, you know, all
[Guest]: that kind of stuff.
[Guest]: When the truth is that, look, you know, we didn't, we haven't really thought about these
[Guest]: things and you can't blame these platforms for doing what they're doing, right?
[Guest]: They haven't, you know, egregiously violated the law.
[Guest]: You know, they did things that were shady, but within the limits of the law.
[Guest]: And yes, in the early days, they tell you, we'll protect your data.
[Guest]: We won't share it.
[Guest]: And then they say, well, maybe we'll share it.
[Guest]: And then they said, screw you.
[Guest]: We're just going to do whatever we want with it.
[Guest]: If you don't want us, you know, we don't want you, right?
[Guest]: We are now sufficiently powerful that we don't need you.
[Guest]: We have all the data anyway.
[Guest]: So that's the situation we're in where a lot of these platforms have just been bad boys.
[Guest]: They've behaved badly.
[Guest]: They've behaved irresponsibly.
[Guest]: And we're seeing the side effects of that.
[Guest]: So it's a more nuanced question than saying, well, you know, why should we get in the way
[Guest]: of freedom, which I completely agree with.
[Guest]: But I think it's more complicated than that because we're in the whole new world here.
[Guest]: We're in the whole brave new world here where, you know, algos have assumed a level of control
[Guest]: that they didn't have, you know, 10 years ago.
[Amit Varma]: We are indeed in a brave new world here, which is why your new podcast is, you know, much
[Amit Varma]: awaited by me and others.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'll come to the political economy and the governance aspect of what do we do
[Amit Varma]: about big tech later on in the second half of the show.
[Amit Varma]: But I'd like to sort of stay on this for a moment to kind of take a step back and get
[Amit Varma]: a little meta and just look at a sort of a broader philosophical aspect of it.
[Amit Varma]: Because one, you could argue that there is no such thing as free will, however, we should
[Amit Varma]: still behave as if there is.
[Amit Varma]: So instead of people's actions being determined by random events, it is sort of perhaps more
[Amit Varma]: concentrated.
[Amit Varma]: But the other aspect of that is like, let me zoom into the political discourse, which
[Amit Varma]: is something, you know, I kind of think about a fair bit.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, I can talk about in some detail, like, I think a lot of what exacerbated like,
[Amit Varma]: I think, a seminal moment in this kind of political polarization was the introduction
[Amit Varma]: of the Facebook like button, maybe around 2008 or 2009, or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Because then what happens is that people start craving likes, because they get their dopamine
[Amit Varma]: rushes.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, in a Twitter context, they will start craving retweets, because they want
[Amit Varma]: that dopamine, they want the notifications to fill up with validation.
[Amit Varma]: Now, where does that come from?
[Amit Varma]: It comes from a human need for validation, which those tools are playing to which is
[Amit Varma]: why they are so effective.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this leads to polarization, because to maximize your likes, and to maximize your
[Amit Varma]: retweets, you take more and more extreme positions, you do more and more, which you signaling
[Amit Varma]: whether you are on the left or the right or whatever, you are doing all that and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, and these echo chambers form and what Cass Sunstein calls group polarization, then
[Amit Varma]: automatically happens.
[Amit Varma]: But there are a couple of points here.
[Amit Varma]: One point is that these functionalities also serve a useful purpose.
[Amit Varma]: For example, almost every ad that I see these days is targeted towards me and is therefore
[Amit Varma]: useful to both me and the advertiser in a mutual sense, you know, when I go to YouTube,
[Amit Varma]: I'm damn happy that their algorithm is tracking my preferences to such a fine degree, because
[Amit Varma]: it is serving up much more relevant content, and is acting as a fantastic filter in that
[Amit Varma]: sense.
[Amit Varma]: The other aspect of it is that there is nothing teleological or intentional about this.
[Amit Varma]: It's one thing that say when a foreign country says that I want to, you know, spread misinformation,
[Amit Varma]: and I want to influence an election, there is an intent, there's a teleology there, that's
[Amit Varma]: not necessarily the case when it comes to a social media platform, putting something
[Amit Varma]: there that actually makes your experience pleasurable in certain ways, like the Facebook
[Amit Varma]: like button or the Twitter retweet button.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, to cut a long story short, what I'm coming at is that all the problems that
[Amit Varma]: we see emerging out of social media and out of the internet and all of that, and I'm not
[Amit Varma]: using this as an argument for one or the other, I mean, this just in a descriptive sense,
[Amit Varma]: these are problems inherent in humanity, not in technology.
[Amit Varma]: It just so happens that technology has, for example, played on this need for validation
[Amit Varma]: and you know, created this effect and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But the deeper thing that we perhaps need to think about and that should give us a cause
[Amit Varma]: to ponder and perhaps just be more humble about our species as a whole, is that we are
[Amit Varma]: deeply flawed and messed up.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, a lot of that finds expression through technology nowadays.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: We are very deeply flawed and quite deeply messed up.
[Guest]: And our history has been quite brutal, right?
[Guest]: I mean, we've come from, I guess, you know, being savages to being feudal, you know, I
[Guest]: mean, so we, you know, humanity has gone through sort of, you know, you know, savagery, you
[Guest]: know, followed by slavery and then feudalism, you know, and then law, right?
[Guest]: So we've kind of then created societies around law, right?
[Guest]: So that's been sort of the progression of humanity.
[Guest]: It's been a positive progression.
[Guest]: And now we're in the age of tech where we'd actually implement law so much more easily
[Guest]: and actually it'll turbocharge law as well.
[Guest]: So we've had like a brutal history, but I think the solution is not control because
[Guest]: who the hell knows what the right amount of control and what the right control is, right?
[Guest]: The solution isn't control, but it's transparency, right?
[Guest]: We need to be aware of our savage instincts, of our limitations, right?
[Guest]: So we need to become more self-aware and that's where I see the solution, right?
[Guest]: So I, you know, so I tend to be an optimist, right?
[Guest]: I'm not, you know, despite these dysfunctional kind of, you know, dark scenarios that people
[Guest]: paint about the future, I actually think the future is going to be pretty amazing because
[Guest]: I have optimism in the ability of mankind to sort of, you know, rescue ourselves from
[Guest]: the precipice, right?
[Guest]: The stakes are too high.
[Guest]: We, you know, we don't want to like destroy our society, you know, we've come close at
[Guest]: a few points, you know, with the cold war and things, but we've sort of been aware of,
[Guest]: you know, of some of these risks that technology has introduced in society, right?
[Guest]: The fact that we can destroy ourselves, you know, with a push of a few buttons, right?
[Guest]: So we're in a society that has tremendous destructive potential.
[Guest]: And the internet is similar.
[Guest]: It has some amazing positive potential, much of which we've seen, right?
[Guest]: But we're beginning to see some of these dysfunctional aspects of the interplay between technology
[Guest]: and humans.
[Guest]: I agree with you that it's, there's nothing evil about the technology.
[Guest]: The technology itself, one might even argue it's neutral.
[Guest]: It's the way it's employed that we need to be aware of.
[Guest]: And that's what governance is really all about, right?
[Guest]: That's what internet governance is really all about, about being aware of our limitations,
[Guest]: about being aware of our history, about being aware of how we're interacting with these
[Guest]: platforms and going into this with our eyes open and then saying, hey, what's the best
[Guest]: way to govern?
[Guest]: The trouble is when things get dark, right?
[Guest]: When people function in the dark, that's when shit happens, right?
[Guest]: And we've seen this in every industry, like finance, like, you know, Wall Street were
[Guest]: the bad boys for decades, they were the flogging horse, right?
[Guest]: It used to be an expression, look at Wall Street, right?
[Guest]: Wall Street was synonymous with evil, right?
[Guest]: Because people had gotten greedy, you know, they would treat customers badly.
[Guest]: They would do things that were unethical because regulation didn't exist that was, you know,
[Guest]: geared towards finding that, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, regulators always sort of behind the eight ball, right?
[Guest]: People close to the ground find ways to function, find ways around the system and bankers were
[Guest]: no different, right?
[Guest]: They were functioning within the law, but were doing unethical things, right?
[Guest]: And that led to all kinds of problems.
[Guest]: There were lots of NASDAQ dealers that got fined in the 90s, you know, for throwing customers'
[Guest]: orders into the garbage or not answering phones and, you know, stuff like that, just bad stuff.
[Guest]: And so regulation came in and said, hey, you know, like we see this thing going on, we
[Guest]: have to, you know, put some constraints around it so that these people don't destabilize
[Guest]: the system.
[Guest]: They don't favor customers over others, right?
[Guest]: So the reason the financial system of the U.S. is sort of the most trusted in the world
[Guest]: is because it's been through all kinds of phases, bad stuff's happened.
[Guest]: People have come and looked at it.
[Guest]: They've sorted it out, you know, to the degree that people have trust in the system and systems
[Guest]: don't function unless there's a fundamental degree of trust in it, right?
[Guest]: And that's why people trust the U.S. financial system, even though it has its, you know,
[Guest]: moments of insanity, right?
[Guest]: For the most part, it's things have to add up, right?
[Guest]: There's a regulation you have to follow, you know, you just can't do whatever you want,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Whereas, you know, Mr. Zuckerberg can turn a dial and do what the hell he wants and no
[Guest]: one is aware of what's going on, right?
[Guest]: So the solution to it is transparency.
[Guest]: We've got to know what these guys are doing, what's, you know, what's going on inside these
[Guest]: platforms, right?
[Guest]: If, you know, Jane and Gene are working for me, calling customers all day, the regulator
[Guest]: wants to do like, you know, wants to know what did Jane and Gene do all day?
[Guest]: But if Jane and Gene are machines, do I just get a pass?
[Guest]: Because they're robots and they can call people all day and do stuff under the radar?
[Guest]: No, that doesn't make any sense, right?
[Guest]: Why should we treat humans and machines differently if they're doing the similar kind of thing
[Guest]: and, you know, resulting in risks to the system, right?
[Guest]: So in financial services, we figured this stuff around, around humans first and then
[Guest]: around systems because the financial industry was one of the first to automate and adopt
[Guest]: technology because the stakes were the highest.
[Guest]: And then, you know, we learned to wrap sensible regulation around it, but mostly sensible
[Guest]: anyway.
[Guest]: And so that's where I see ourselves more generally in the social media space, right?
[Guest]: So I see that as kind of the current Wild West, which, you know, the financial industry
[Guest]: was in the 70s and the 80s and 90s.
[Guest]: Those are relative Wild West days.
[Guest]: That's where I see ourselves now in terms of internet governance.
[Guest]: So we need that transparency.
[Guest]: And what I think we're talking about is what does that actually mean, right?
[Guest]: What does that look like?
[Guest]: You know, sounds great, but, you know, to Zuckerberg and Dorsey, transparency means,
[Guest]: well, you know, we'll give you quarterly reports that'll tell you all the crap that happened
[Guest]: on our platform.
[Guest]: And believe me, we'll be good about it, right?
[Guest]: You know, trust us, right?
[Guest]: You know, would we have trusted the bankers of the great financial crisis if they said,
[Guest]: you know, yeah, sorry, I know we were irresponsible and we did all kinds of off balance sheet
[Guest]: transactions, but believe me, we've learned and trust me, we'll never do this again, right?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Good luck with that one, right?
[Guest]: That's where we're at with internet platforms.
[Guest]: And they're going to go through a similar process of scrutiny.
[Guest]: And it's about time, right?
[Guest]: Not to say that this will be fast and expeditious and effective.
[Guest]: I'm sure it'll be messy.
[Guest]: But we're heading in the right direction.
[Guest]: And being an optimist, I'm optimistic that, you know, we'll solve this problem.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, you described your life as in terms of what Jerry Garcia spoke about what
[Amit Varma]: a long, strange trip it's been.
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, because I just realized that you've been on two frontiers.
[Amit Varma]: One is a wild west of Wall Street in the 1990s when you worked there.
[Amit Varma]: And now the current sort of wild west of this current situation.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll talk more about what to do with Jane and Gene.
[Amit Varma]: But if Jane and Gene are listening to this, which I have no doubt they probably are, because
[Amit Varma]: hey, AI, they can relax a bit, because we'll do that after a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: So Jane and Gene, you have one minute to get to act together.
[Amit Varma]: As many of you know, I'll soon be coming out with a four volume anthology of the seen and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen books organized around the themes of politics, history, economics, and society
[Amit Varma]: and culture.
[Amit Varma]: These days, I'm wading through over 3 million words of conversation from all my episodes
[Amit Varma]: so far to curate the best bits.
[Amit Varma]: And for this to happen, I needed transcripts.
[Amit Varma]: And that was made possible by a remarkable young startup called Tapchief.
[Amit Varma]: Tapchief at tapchief.com is a digital platform that allows companies to outsource work to
[Amit Varma]: their network of freelancers.
[Amit Varma]: And Tapchief's network includes more than 125,000 people as of now.
[Amit Varma]: You want people to make you a web page or design a logo or compose a jingle or do some
[Amit Varma]: digital marketing for you.
[Amit Varma]: Tapchief gives you an easy way to reach out to freelancers competing for your work.
[Amit Varma]: I can say from first hand experience how valuable this has been for me and solve the problem
[Amit Varma]: I was actually a bit worried about.
[Amit Varma]: So do go over to tapchief.com and check out all that Tapchief has to offer.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they could solve your problem too.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Vasanth here about the brave new world we are in and brave new world actually
[Amit Varma]: makes it sound exciting, but he's optimistic and so am I.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll just look at, you know, we won't rename it to scary new world or the dystopian
[Amit Varma]: future or anything like that.
[Amit Varma]: It is a brave new world.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, I was going to sort of leave the the last part of the episode for talking
[Amit Varma]: about the current times about sort of what we ought to do about big data and all the
[Amit Varma]: dangers that we can all agree it poses.
[Amit Varma]: But since we are on the subject, I think I might as well go there now.
[Amit Varma]: And here I'm, I found your writing on this very insightful and I'm in agreement as well,
[Amit Varma]: because whenever I've discussed this issue in the past, it struck me that many of the
[Amit Varma]: problems that are arising from the way our data platforms behave, such as increasing
[Amit Varma]: polarization, are social problems and we have to find social solutions.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm a bit wary of the state getting involved because, you know, we always assume when we
[Amit Varma]: advocate state sort of getting into solve something that it will always be benevolent
[Amit Varma]: and benign and it is rarely the case.
[Amit Varma]: So you want to, you know, achieve things with as little state coercion as possible, like
[Amit Varma]: even for the financial crisis, a lot of the things that went wrong, like even, you know,
[Amit Varma]: going back to the bad incentives of the Community Reinvestment Act in the late 70s or the moral
[Amit Varma]: hazard posed by the way Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac behaved is sort of an example of what
[Amit Varma]: a state interference can do.
[Amit Varma]: But the solution that you come up with actually empowers users more than coerces them.
[Amit Varma]: And this also comes from something that Ben Thompson of Statutory once wrote, which I
[Amit Varma]: agree with, so I'll just quote him, where Thompson discussing the possible regulation
[Amit Varma]: of big data wrote, quote, if regulators, EU or otherwise truly want to constrain Facebook
[Amit Varma]: and Google, or for that matter, all of the other ad networks and companies that in reality
[Amit Varma]: are far more of a threat to user privacy, then the ultimate force is user demand.
[Amit Varma]: And the lever is demanding transparency on exactly what these companies are doing.
[Amit Varma]: And I came across this excellent piece that you had written recently, it'll be linked
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes, where you wrote about three ways to increase social media platforms
[Amit Varma]: transparency.
[Amit Varma]: And I love the solution, because here, what it is, is it's not the state using the strong
[Amit Varma]: arm on specific companies to say, do X, do Y, do Z, it's just making them more transparent.
[Amit Varma]: So then users can decide for themselves whether they want to engage with those platforms or
[Amit Varma]: not.
[Amit Varma]: So take me through these sort of these three ways to increase the transparency, so to say.
[Guest]: So not surprisingly, the solution that I'm proposing has been motivated by the financial
[Guest]: services industry that we were talking about, one that is regulated, and that for the most
[Guest]: part seems to work all right, at least in terms of engendering trust in the system.
[Guest]: So if you think about it, some of the assumptions that we've been working under are a little
[Guest]: bit outdated regarding, let's say, anonymity.
[Guest]: So the first thing I proposed is that, and by the way, in 2016, when I first suggested
[Guest]: that we should regulate the social media platforms, I got a lot of backlash from people for being
[Guest]: un-American and all that kind of stuff, because people felt, you know, this is a free country,
[Guest]: they should be able to do whatever they want.
[Guest]: But it was becoming clear that that really wasn't going to work, because one of the things
[Guest]: about a democracy is, and people don't often recognize this, is that it's not just about
[Guest]: rights, but it's also about obligations.
[Guest]: So yeah, we have rights in a liberal democracy, rights to be free, but we also have an obligation
[Guest]: towards our citizens.
[Guest]: We can't go around killing people, there's a certain sort of expectation and norms that
[Guest]: exist in democratic society.
[Guest]: And so what I suggested was that we need user transparency.
[Guest]: These platforms need to know who the users are, who you're dealing with, like a bank
[Guest]: knows who it's dealing with, right?
[Guest]: You can't just set up a bank account without adequate credentials and authentication, like
[Guest]: to prove to them that you are who you say you are.
[Guest]: Now, India, by the way, has a fascinating solution to this with the Aadhaar platform,
[Guest]: like really forward thinking solution.
[Guest]: But this is what banks do, are you who you say you are, like know your user, right?
[Guest]: So in banking, it's called know your customer.
[Guest]: Now in the social media space, customers are actually advertisers because they're the ones
[Guest]: paying you.
[Guest]: But what I suggested, you should know your users.
[Guest]: If someone is on platform, who are they, right?
[Guest]: Can they authenticate who they say they are?
[Guest]: Because I think they have a responsibility, not to you and me, they can still use a pseudonym
[Guest]: and function anonymously.
[Guest]: But the platform must know who the hell am I dealing with?
[Guest]: Who is this a real person, right?
[Guest]: They need to know.
[Guest]: Is this a person?
[Guest]: Is it a bot?
[Guest]: What am I dealing with?
[Guest]: So that's the first thing that I suggested is, you know, since we're all talking about
[Guest]: transparency, well, let's just be transparent to the platform, right?
[Guest]: And so they know who they're dealing with.
[Guest]: Is that an invasion of privacy?
[Guest]: No, it isn't.
[Guest]: It's no more an invasion of privacy, like, you know, if you're required to provide your
[Guest]: bank with information, that's not an invasion of privacy.
[Guest]: It's just like you authenticating and guaranteeing who you say you are, and by the way, you're
[Guest]: also agreeing to behave yourself, right, with the bank, right?
[Guest]: You're agreeing not to conduct fraudulent transactions, and you're not going to do trades
[Guest]: that destabilize the market, and you're agreeing implicitly to a lot of things when you sign
[Guest]: up with an account.
[Guest]: So it's not an invasion of privacy, right?
[Guest]: They should know their user, right?
[Guest]: And yet so far, their motivations have been exactly the opposite.
[Guest]: They'd rather not know their users, right?
[Guest]: It's actually more profitable for them not to know their users, right?
[Guest]: Like, you want another account?
[Guest]: Come on over, sign up, say whatever you want.
[Guest]: And so my solution is, yeah, you can say whatever you want, but we need to know who you are,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Authenticate yourself, the platform.
[Guest]: The second thing I propose is that just like I can, as a regulator, go into a bank and
[Guest]: say, hey, show me that you haven't been favoring some customers over others.
[Guest]: And I've had to do that twice myself over the last 10 years to regulators in the hedge
[Guest]: fund that we operate.
[Guest]: It's a machine learning-based fund.
[Guest]: Regulators come over and they ask us all kinds of stuff.
[Guest]: We have to show them all our trades, how they were allocated to clients.
[Guest]: We weren't favoring anyone.
[Guest]: They all made the same amount of money, right?
[Guest]: So they come in and do a bunch of tests on us and tell us whether we passed or failed.
[Guest]: Now, in financial services, these guys have been doing this for a long time.
[Guest]: They know what they're looking for, right?
[Guest]: They're looking for the bad behavior they're looking for.
[Guest]: So what I'm proposing is something similar, right, in the social media space.
[Guest]: If you're actually generating revenues by making recommendations, well, then keep a
[Guest]: history of it.
[Guest]: You don't need to share that with the rest of the world, but just keep it.
[Guest]: In case regulators want to come in next year and say, so, like, have you been making recommendations?
[Guest]: Tell us.
[Guest]: Show us, right?
[Guest]: And you should be able to do that.
[Guest]: At the moment, there's no such requirement, right?
[Guest]: There's absolutely no transparency.
[Guest]: So that's the second thing, the ability to provide audit trails of your behavior, right?
[Guest]: And this, by the way, will get rid of a lot of problems that we're having right now, right?
[Guest]: The very fact that you know you're being observed makes you behave, right?
[Guest]: Not that you will, that they'll come in and, like, want to see everything, but the fact
[Guest]: is that they can, right?
[Guest]: So you have to behave in accordance with how you're supposed to, right?
[Guest]: So that's the second word was transparency in terms of the ability to produce audit trails
[Guest]: of your actions.
[Guest]: That was the second one.
[Guest]: And the third one was algorithmic transparency, which is, what did Jane and Gene do all day
[Guest]: anyway?
[Guest]: You know, like, broadly speaking, what are they doing?
[Guest]: Are they soliciting?
[Guest]: Well, okay, if they're soliciting, how are they doing it, you know?
[Guest]: Is it, are they using legitimate data?
[Guest]: And after they do the solicitation stuff, what actually happens, you know, does engagement
[Guest]: actually go up?
[Guest]: What were the consequences of that?
[Guest]: We can actually look at that, right?
[Guest]: So regulators should have the ability to go in and see what the hell is going on inside
[Guest]: this operation, right?
[Guest]: So it's like operational transparency through the algorithm.
[Guest]: So to me, these are, I don't know, they seem like no brainers to me, like what's wrong
[Guest]: with this?
[Guest]: What's wrong with these three forms of transparency?
[Guest]: Yeah, you can keep doing your secret sauce and have your algorithms and smart algorithms
[Guest]: and whatever, but we just need to be able to see what you've actually done, just like
[Guest]: we do in other industries.
[Guest]: So that's what I've proposed is that these are simple ways to increase transparency without
[Guest]: really much in the way of downside, as far as I can see, other than the fact that you
[Guest]: need to store a lot of stuff.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: And I like these solutions because none of these seem like state overreach to me, which
[Amit Varma]: is something that I'd otherwise be worried about.
[Amit Varma]: And one hears suggestions to that account as well, though I was a bit concerned by your
[Amit Varma]: framing of it is, you know, obligations along with rights.
[Amit Varma]: So you don't need it in the same sense as our prime minister did, where Narendra Modi
[Amit Varma]: keeps talking about how it's not just about fundamental rights, but fundamental duties,
[Amit Varma]: which by the way, is a phrase introduced into our constitution by Indira Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like from one great totalitarian to the other, in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And what I keep pointing out is that, listen, it's okay to talk about duties, but we should
[Amit Varma]: remember that individuals don't have a duty to the state, the state has a duty to individuals.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, the only obligations I would recognize on the part of individuals is not
[Amit Varma]: to transgress on the rights of others, which really, you know, comes down to the framing
[Amit Varma]: of rights as well.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, I mean, as far as the state having an obligation to its citizens is concerned,
[Amit Varma]: I don't see how this kind of regulation is an overreach in any way.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm good with these, except that, thinking aloud, my thought would be that I totally
[Amit Varma]: agree that if everyone had to authenticate herself to the platform, they would automatically
[Amit Varma]: behave themselves.
[Amit Varma]: But the other two, I don't know what difference it would make.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if you have algorithmic transparency, and they show you an algorithm that says that
[Amit Varma]: we connect people with like minded people, and we allow them to express themselves in
[Amit Varma]: whatever way they want, as long as they are not transgressing the laws or inciting a crime.
[Amit Varma]: In that case, you know, that would be perfectly legit, you can't argue with that.
[Amit Varma]: And yet that does go all the polarization and all of that is sort of happening because
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, would that really solve the problem?
[Amit Varma]: We sometimes assume that many of the problems that are being caused by big tech is somehow
[Amit Varma]: there are malign algorithms, which are doing malicious things and deliberately spreading
[Amit Varma]: misinformation.
[Amit Varma]: But no, I would argue that, you know, there are, you know, algorithms, which are completely
[Amit Varma]: benign, like connecting you to like be like minded people and allowing you to express
[Amit Varma]: yourself, which you know, the problem is with humanity, not technology and regulating technology
[Amit Varma]: won't necessarily solve that.
[Amit Varma]: And I know what you said isn't intended as a panacea, obviously, so but this thought
[Amit Varma]: just came to mind.
[Guest]: You're absolutely right on that.
[Guest]: But this reminds me of some of my colleagues who teach ethics.
[Guest]: And the thing you become aware of is that I can conjure up a scenario where it's actually
[Guest]: fine to lie.
[Guest]: I can conjure up a scenario where I say, okay, you know, you have two choices, right?
[Guest]: One is, you know, if you just tell this little lie, the planet will be saved.
[Guest]: But if you tell the truth, we'll all be destroyed.
[Guest]: What's the right thing to do?
[Guest]: The right thing to do is to lie, right, even though we know that you shouldn't lie, right?
[Guest]: So and that's the nuance here that we need to appreciate, you know, you're absolutely
[Guest]: right that, you know, look, you can't like transgress and interfere with people's freedoms
[Guest]: and tell them what to do and tell these platforms how to operate the algorithms, right?
[Guest]: But if I conjure up a really extreme scenario, right, one that's just so compelling, right,
[Guest]: that you can't ignore it, then what do you do?
[Guest]: So for example, for me, a compelling scenario might be that, so Facebook's been recording
[Guest]: all its recommendations, everything to everyone, right, for the last year, the last couple
[Guest]: of years.
[Guest]: And then we go back and look at the stuff and we say, you know what, like, this is all
[Guest]: well and good, but for people like under 17 years of age, it's leading to like increases
[Guest]: in suicide, and we can actually demonstrate that, you know, quite convincingly that your
[Guest]: algorithms that are doing whatever the hell they're doing, we have no idea, are, you know,
[Guest]: there's like very strong evidence that leading to like a tenfold increase in teen suicide,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Like, what would you do in that case, right?
[Guest]: Would you still say, well, you know, it's a free country, like, let him die, right?
[Guest]: That's free will, they're just bringing them upon themselves.
[Guest]: They should be smarter than to know that they should get, you know, sucked in by whatever
[Guest]: they're doing.
[Guest]: Clearly, that's not good enough, right?
[Guest]: In the physical world, we have all kinds of safeguards, like with food, you're required
[Guest]: to label the food and show what's in it, right?
[Guest]: With something else, you know, you can always come up with scenarios where people have sort
[Guest]: of decided that something crosses a line, and that is an acceptable behavior.
[Guest]: That's the situation we're in, we just don't know enough at the moment about the consequences
[Guest]: of sort of the Wild West that we're in at the moment, right?
[Guest]: We have suggestive evidence that tells us we should be concerned, but we don't have
[Guest]: all the data.
[Guest]: And we struggle with it, right?
[Guest]: There was a Supreme Court judgment last week in the US, where the Supreme Court ruled that
[Guest]: Governor Cuomo's edict to ban gatherings, let's say religious gatherings, of over 50
[Guest]: or 25 in the red zone was banned, prohibited, and the Supreme Court ruled it unconstitutional.
[Guest]: And one of the reasons that, you know, one of the judges, I think maybe it was Neil Gorsuch,
[Guest]: said that, you know, there's no evidence that suggests that these institutions have been
[Guest]: responsible for the spread of the virus.
[Guest]: There's no evidence, right?
[Guest]: So you can look at that, and so we're going to apply the strict scrutiny test to this.
[Guest]: Now, the question I have is, supposing we were South Korea, right, and we had actually
[Guest]: measured these things, right, we'd measured how many people gather, the infection rates,
[Guest]: all that kind of stuff, right, and you present this to the nine Supreme Court justices, and
[Guest]: you say, you know what, you know, your honorable selves, what we're seeing is that, you know,
[Guest]: when gatherings go above 49, I'm just making this up, you know, and the base rate of infections
[Guest]: in that community is more than, you know, X, the spread of the disease tends to be tenfold
[Guest]: higher than it is otherwise, and here's the data to show it, right, there's like 300 cases,
[Guest]: you know, and here are the statistics, right, would the Supreme Court justices still come
[Guest]: up with the same verdict?
[Guest]: I would think that they would be affected by the evidence, right?
[Guest]: So what I'm getting at is more transparency for society in general, where we can make
[Guest]: these decisions based on the evidence, right, as opposed to our value systems or beliefs
[Guest]: or assumptions, right?
[Guest]: That's the old way, right?
[Guest]: The brave new world will consist of data being, you know, having sort of first-class status
[Guest]: in decision-making and not just people's assumptions and norms, right, that is, we should look
[Guest]: at data, we should be influenced by evidence, and that cuts across, you know, all areas
[Guest]: of our lives.
[Guest]: So, you know, it just sort of comes back to, no, there shouldn't be overreach, that's the
[Guest]: last thing we need is government overreach, but we do need some way where the government
[Guest]: is acting intelligently based on the evidence at hand, and it's transparent, right?
[Guest]: To me, that's the best of both worlds, is the government is accountable, and it's transparent,
[Guest]: and we have a contract with the government, we, I mean individuals, that we can agree
[Guest]: that certain uses of data are for the larger social good, and we work out ways where we
[Guest]: prevent these transgressions from taking place, right, where we don't get an overly enthusiastic
[Guest]: government coming and changing the rules on us.
[Guest]: And that's the situation where we're in at the moment, we find ourselves in.
[Guest]: It is a brave new world, right, it's a whole new world of how we govern the internet, how
[Guest]: we allow machines to influence and play larger roles in our lives in a way that's better
[Guest]: all around for everyone, you know, better for society, better for individuals, but we
[Guest]: need to think about this and do it consciously, because the rate at which we're going, that
[Guest]: sort of Wild West ways, won't get us there.
[Guest]: I'm optimistic that we are seeing the problem in time, and that we will walk away from the
[Guest]: precipice and come up with solutions that make sense.
[Amit Varma]: So let me sort of probe a little deeper in the sense that I obviously agree with you
[Amit Varma]: on the desirability of transparency, not just in this domain, but so many others.
[Amit Varma]: But what I'm a little skeptical about is the efficacy of it.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason why that is not a technical point, but has consequences, is that if one
[Amit Varma]: finds later on down the line, that greater transparency doesn't actually solve the problem,
[Amit Varma]: then the state can use it as a pretext to actually overreach.
[Amit Varma]: Now, let me sort of drill down into one concrete and ask you about one hypothetical example
[Amit Varma]: that you brought up and ask you to get concrete.
[Amit Varma]: Now you spoke about how, if there is algorithmic transparency, and we find that there is some
[Amit Varma]: algorithmic action that has led to a rise in teen suicides, right?
[Amit Varma]: Now every reasonable person agrees that that's a problem, and we should solve it.
[Amit Varma]: The question here is, number one, how do you establish causality when there are so many
[Amit Varma]: algorithms doing so many things and so many influences otherwise?
[Amit Varma]: Number two, even if you manage to pinpoint a particular algorithm that shows that there
[Amit Varma]: is some causality, that algorithm could by itself both be benign and could have positive
[Amit Varma]: effects in another way.
[Amit Varma]: For example, an algorithm that allows people to meet like-minded people and talk about
[Amit Varma]: things that they care about could foreseeably lead to sort of a rise in teen suicides because
[Amit Varma]: you could have young teens coming together and, you know, driving each other more and
[Amit Varma]: more towards despair.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you could have young teens coming together and sort of cheering
[Amit Varma]: each other up and moving away from the precipice.
[Amit Varma]: And the latter case would, of course, be unseen.
[Amit Varma]: What would be seen would be the suicides, if I might invoke the name of the show.
[Amit Varma]: So then the question would be that, first of all, how do you determine causality in
[Amit Varma]: terms of which algorithm causes, two, how do you separate out, you know, the ill effects
[Amit Varma]: of a benign algorithm if the algorithm also did many good things, such as connecting like-minded
[Amit Varma]: people like you and me together, which could have happened, you know, through social media
[Amit Varma]: for all that we know, you know, and so when I drill down to the concrete, it becomes difficult.
[Amit Varma]: And then if you leave it to human judgment at how this caused that, then human judgment
[Amit Varma]: will always be flawed.
[Amit Varma]: And when it's a judgment of the state will always end up enhancing their power or I mean,
[Amit Varma]: this is, of course, a non-political example.
[Amit Varma]: But if there is a political example, then it will play to the biases of whichever side
[Amit Varma]: holds the levers of the state at that point in time, which could be either the far right
[Amit Varma]: or the far left.
[Amit Varma]: So is it sort of, and obviously, forgive me if it's a new question, but can you give me
[Amit Varma]: an example of, is there an actual instance where in this context of social media causing
[Amit Varma]: behavior, you figured out that a specific set of algorithms actually caused a specific
[Amit Varma]: kind of problem in the real world?
[Guest]: So there were at least two things you were alluding to in your question.
[Guest]: One was the difficulty of doing the science itself, and the fact that you may not find
[Guest]: anything significant once you do the science.
[Guest]: That is the causality may be hard to establish, there may be considerable uncertainty associated
[Guest]: with the conclusions you're drawing, even if you find some effect, there's still what
[Guest]: I call variance around it and uncertainty.
[Guest]: And that's certainly true.
[Guest]: And I guess in a sense, I'm sort of assuming that we can solve that problem, that in fact,
[Guest]: if there is no demonstration of causality and no statistically significant relationship
[Guest]: between A and B, well, then that should not be used, right?
[Guest]: Then it's telling you that there's nothing to worry about, right?
[Guest]: So what I'm assuming is that we first do find things that we have to worry about, right?
[Guest]: And we're finding those already, right?
[Guest]: And that's the last two years have revealed all some of the things that we should be worried
[Guest]: about, but probably not all of them, right?
[Guest]: So to me, transparency is about achieving awareness, because once you're aware of something,
[Guest]: you can act more intelligently, right?
[Guest]: So if you're aware of the fact that, let's say, certain algorithms are leading to teen
[Guest]: depression, right?
[Guest]: That there's a high association between those two, well, then maybe we can start taking
[Guest]: mitigating steps, like making teens more aware of how these algorithms might be influencing
[Amit Varma]: them, right?
[Amit Varma]: But if I might interrupt you, algorithms such as what, like I'm just having difficulty conceiving
[Amit Varma]: of an algorithm that specifically causes, say, teen depression rates to rise apart from
[Amit Varma]: the very general ones of bringing like-minded people together.
[Guest]: So let's say that I come up with an algorithm that finds a way of connecting various kinds
[Guest]: of teens together that increases overall engagement among them, but also increases discord among
[Guest]: them, which you can actually see in the data.
[Guest]: You can look at what they're saying, right?
[Guest]: And by the way, I'm making this up.
[Guest]: I'm not saying that this is actually happening, right?
[Guest]: So platform is doing something, and we observe that it's actually leading to more engagement.
[Guest]: People are talking more to each other, but you know what?
[Guest]: This talking is actually not good talk.
[Guest]: It's bad talk.
[Guest]: And, you know, and that bad talk is, you know, correlated with, you know, depressions and
[Guest]: suicides in that zip code, right?
[Guest]: In that area, right?
[Guest]: Now let's say the science was done really well, and it's showing you this.
[Guest]: Well, are you going to ignore it, right?
[Guest]: Well, you could, but it's probably not a good idea to ignore it, right?
[Guest]: Because there's something going on that you should probably do something about, right?
[Guest]: And you know, this is something you may not have been even aware of earlier, right?
[Guest]: I mean, how do you know this is going on if you don't even have the data?
[Guest]: But if I have sufficient evidence to know that something is going on among the users
[Guest]: of that platform that's leading to some very undesirable societal outcome, then I should
[Guest]: figure out what I can do about it.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: It's, that's all.
[Guest]: And so if, but if there's nothing, well, then I shouldn't do anything about it, right?
[Guest]: So I'm assuming that the science has been done, you know, notwithstanding the messiness
[Guest]: of it, right?
[Guest]: Sometimes the data is hard, it's noisy, you know, we're used to dealing with that, you
[Guest]: know?
[Guest]: So we can deal with that.
[Guest]: But presumably, we can still do the science well, and establish either causality or a
[Guest]: strong association that may suggest causality that's worth exploring.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Let's sort of move on to how different regimes across the world are actually sort of handling
[Amit Varma]: this problem.
[Amit Varma]: Like in a piece that you wrote, headlined, In the AI Era, Privacy and Democracy are in
[Amit Varma]: Peril.
[Amit Varma]: You wrote, quote, I recommend regulating the use of personal data for prediction products.
[Amit Varma]: I also propose classifying certain platforms as digital utilities that aim to maximize
[Amit Varma]: public benefit and spur economic growth, much like the interstate highway system, and the
[Amit Varma]: information superhighway have done for physical and electronic commerce, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And then you talk about four major models of data use, which is at the extremes US and
[Amit Varma]: China and then EU and India as well.
[Amit Varma]: So can you talk a bit about these four different approaches, where they come from, how, you
[Amit Varma]: know, effective they are, and what do you feel closest to in terms of actually solving
[Guest]: the problem?
[Guest]: So they all have their strengths and weaknesses, right?
[Guest]: The strength of the US model is that it's free, right?
[Guest]: It's free of like almost, you know, any kind of regulation at this point.
[Guest]: And so it's grown up sort of organically, right?
[Guest]: This is the way that the internet has developed in the US and people would argue that there've
[Guest]: been lots of good things that have happened, that all kinds of really cool stuff has emerged
[Guest]: that may not have, you know, if we hadn't given these internet companies and the platform
[Guest]: complete freedom and absolved them from lawsuits and responsibilities and things like that.
[Guest]: So that's the beauty of the US model.
[Guest]: But we've seen the problems with it emerge recently, that these platforms have become
[Guest]: so powerful and they've overreached so much in terms of data that they're like messing
[Guest]: some things up, right?
[Guest]: And that's why all the scrutiny around the internet models in the US.
[Guest]: Europe not surprisingly has always been, you know, for accountability, right?
[Guest]: So their approach to it has been sort of responsible data use, right?
[Guest]: That you can use data if it's essential for what you're trying to do, right?
[Guest]: Which also makes sense because they're trying to cut down the risks associated with this
[Guest]: sort of unbridled wild west use of data.
[Guest]: So have some, provide some kind of accountability.
[Guest]: India is sort of a really interesting case for a number of reasons.
[Guest]: So it has sort of this late mover advantage and it also has sort of a different kind of
[Guest]: advantage, which is that I think the people that are sort of influential in tech in India
[Guest]: have sort of more of a social approach to infrastructure.
[Guest]: And there's this notion of sort of public digital infrastructure, not surprisingly has
[Guest]: emerged, you know, mostly, you know, out of India.
[Guest]: And it actually happened maybe partly by accident, you know, partly it was serendipity, you know,
[Guest]: that we decided to implement the Aadhaar platform, right?
[Guest]: Which was for authentication and to actually bring people who didn't have an identity prior
[Guest]: to that into the digital mainstream, right?
[Guest]: So now I know there's controversy in India about its misuse and all that kind of stuff,
[Guest]: but I think we'd be silly to, you know, not acknowledge the tremendous benefits that such
[Guest]: a platform can bring to society, right?
[Guest]: So we built that and then it seems to work, right?
[Guest]: It has, you know, 1.2 billion users and it's very widely used for a number of things.
[Guest]: And now we're thinking, oh, maybe we can actually build something on top of this authentication
[Guest]: layer where we can have, you know, and in India, they call it the India stack, where
[Guest]: we can actually stack sort of layers of utility.
[Guest]: So I look at Aadhaar as a utility, that's essentially what it is.
[Guest]: It just does one thing, you know, are you who you say you are?
[Guest]: And it answers that question, yes or no, simple.
[Guest]: It doesn't, it hasn't spilled over into other things, like it's not checking your credit
[Guest]: scores or anything like that.
[Guest]: It's just simple, one function thing in mind.
[Guest]: And now we're thinking, oh, we can layer a system on top of that, that since someone
[Guest]: can authenticate you and they know who you are, you can then say, oh yeah, I want to
[Guest]: share my transcripts of the university or with the school, or I want to share my credit
[Guest]: history with the bank for a certain amount of time.
[Guest]: I like the thinking around it because it's a utility, not unlike sort of the, the, the
[Guest]: internet, right?
[Guest]: Not, not, not unlike, you know, the highway where you're sort of trying to lay the rails
[Guest]: for a utility that will be used like crazy, right?
[Guest]: Where you don't actually want the utility provider to be making a, you know, a ton of
[Guest]: money off of it because it's a utility, it should be priced like electricity or water.
[Guest]: It's a basic thing that everyone engages in, like moving money around, you know, like it's
[Guest]: a utility.
[Guest]: There's so much of it happening.
[Guest]: It should happen almost costlessly, you know, because after all, it's just a ledger entry,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: It's not like you have a Pony Express moving money from A to B that costs money.
[Guest]: It is costless.
[Guest]: And so it should be costless.
[Guest]: It should be utility.
[Guest]: So I like the thinking in India around this, which is around data that is personal, non-personal,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And non-personal becomes community data, right?
[Guest]: So maybe, you know, if you and I go to the hospital, maybe that data can be anonymized,
[Guest]: you know, and it becomes sort of a community data set.
[Guest]: But you can say that, you know, people over 50 who have this, who are exposed to this
[Guest]: are at risk.
[Guest]: And therefore we can craft some, you know, health policy around that based on community
[Guest]: data, right?
[Guest]: Now, this thinking is in its early stages, right?
[Guest]: I've read the reports that have come out around this.
[Guest]: They're interesting, but they have all kinds of holes in them that haven't really been
[Guest]: thought out, but that's okay.
[Guest]: You know, we can sort those out.
[Guest]: So I like the thinking in India around this sort of public digital infrastructure and
[Guest]: building layers on top of that, where people are in control and consent to have that data
[Guest]: used or, you know, for a certain amount of time and for a specific purpose.
[Guest]: To me, that's sort of the best of both worlds, where users are aware and in charge and can
[Guest]: control data, right?
[Guest]: In the US, it's become kind of, we've lost control over that, right?
[Guest]: People have lost control over where their data is, who's using it, for what, what can
[Guest]: they infer from it?
[Guest]: The Chinese model is fascinating and worrisome at the same time, right?
[Guest]: It's fascinating because they've done amazing things with it, right?
[Guest]: They've exercised control and, you know, in a way that's been quite effective, presumably
[Guest]: for things like COVID to the extent that you can trust information coming out of China,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: They've been quite effective at dealing with that.
[Guest]: They've been quite effective at gaining efficiencies by having data centralized.
[Guest]: But you know, there's a nasty side to it, right?
[Guest]: You know, we read these excesses, you know, in Xinjiang against the Uyghurs and, you know,
[Guest]: and God knows what else is there, right?
[Guest]: Dissidents are like rounded up and threatened and things like that, right?
[Guest]: So there's this sort of very dark side of that centralized model that really sort of
[Guest]: bothers me.
[Guest]: And it concerns me when people project that as kind of the better model for internet governance,
[Guest]: because, you know, knowing human history, we should be worried, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I don't trust any institution fully, like any kind of government, you know, yeah,
[Guest]: for the most part, I, you know, I, for the most part, I trust the US government, but
[Guest]: they routinely violate their laws.
[Guest]: Well, I don't know how routinely, but you know, the example that comes to mind is that,
[Guest]: you know, who was that Swami from Pune, who moved to Antelope, Oregon?
[Amit Varma]: Rajneesh.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, Rajneesh.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, Osho, you know, the US government essentially decided, you know, I mean, the
[Guest]: one thing you do is you can't mess with the US government sort of openly and blatantly
[Guest]: that they'll get you, right?
[Guest]: It's a free country.
[Guest]: It's a democracy.
[Guest]: You have rights.
[Guest]: But if you overstep, they'll get you.
[Guest]: And that's what the US government did.
[Guest]: You know, they violated their own laws to get him and basically set an example.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So that's what bothers me about the Chinese model is that, yes, I buy the tremendous benefits
[Guest]: of efficiency and all the good things that come with centralization and control, right,
[Guest]: that you didn't have in the old style centralized regimes, communist regimes, right, where there
[Guest]: was no information.
[Guest]: And so that was a terrible model, a governance model in terms of getting anything done.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And we saw that in Russia, saw that in China, like just bad governance models, whereas now
[Guest]: they're like swimming in data and saying, wow, like, you know, we can do our job so
[Guest]: much better.
[Guest]: If only we had that in the old days, maybe we would have worked then.
[Guest]: So there's this, for lack of a better word, assumption that some people make that, you
[Guest]: know, maybe that is a superior, you know, the central model is a superior governance
[Guest]: model because it leads to efficiencies.
[Amit Varma]: But it is scary to me.
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, if again, if I may think aloud and I'll lead up to like a broader question,
[Amit Varma]: but it seems to me that the Chinese model in some senses is what the Indian state would
[Amit Varma]: like its model to be, except that it isn't efficient enough.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I'll go back to a keyword that you use when you were speaking about the Indian model,
[Amit Varma]: which is consent.
[Amit Varma]: And my issue with Aadhaar has always been, you know, I don't want to enter the debate.
[Amit Varma]: So what kind of system is it?
[Amit Varma]: But my problem with Aadhaar always was an imposition of Aadhaar.
[Amit Varma]: The fact that it was an act of state coercion, and, you know, which, because there your consent
[Amit Varma]: goes out of the window.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of leads me to the sort of the hypothetical question that a couple of hypothetical
[Amit Varma]: questions and again, it's a thought experiment, assume that there is a state that says that
[Amit Varma]: I have access to all the data that there possibly is, including even what you're thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, that can lead to the best possible outcomes for society, if you just submit to
[Amit Varma]: our will, and we'll take care of everything.
[Amit Varma]: Even if it maximizes happiness, is that necessarily the right thing to do?
[Amit Varma]: And to take it even further, if a state was to say that, listen, we figured out the tech,
[Amit Varma]: we figured out the data of how your neurons work, we'll plug electrodes into the brains
[Amit Varma]: of every individual, and we'll make sure that you're permanently in a state of the highest
[Amit Varma]: possible happiness.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something that you would be comfortable with?
[Amit Varma]: Because I would certainly not, obviously, I would say that, you know, the one thing
[Amit Varma]: that should be sacred in all of this is individual autonomy, and therefore consent.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes we get carried away with the power of data, and the seductive allure of
[Amit Varma]: a technology like Aadhaar, which can do all of these things.
[Amit Varma]: And we forget the basic core principles that make a democracy a democracy, which is not
[Amit Varma]: just the fact that you have, you know, elections happening, but also that individual rights
[Amit Varma]: are sort of taken care of, you know, and if you have that mentality, that consent doesn't
[Amit Varma]: matter, Aadhaar is for everybody's good, then that mentality creeps over into what is Chinese
[Amit Varma]: style authoritarianism, except that I don't think it will happen in India, because our
[Amit Varma]: state is simply too incompetent.
[Amit Varma]: What are your thoughts on that?
[Guest]: There was so much stuff I wanted to say, but I'll bring it back to what you started with,
[Guest]: which is, you know, like, how to think and what a good theory is, right, and a good theory
[Guest]: is one that makes fewest unreasonable assumptions, right?
[Guest]: And so I will turn the question around and ask yourself this, which is, like, this scenario
[Guest]: which you painted, this utopian scenario.
[Guest]: Dystopian.
[Guest]: Well, no, but utopian in quotes, which is that your happiness is always maximized, believe
[Guest]: me, you know, if I know what you're thinking, I'll feed you that right amount of dopamine,
[Guest]: and you'll be in bliss forever.
[Guest]: So what are you complaining about, right?
[Guest]: So the question I would ask is, like, what assumptions is that theory hinged on, right?
[Amit Varma]: Are you familiar?
[Amit Varma]: It's a thought experiment.
[Guest]: Are you comfortable with the assumptions on which that theory is based?
[Guest]: And I would wager that you will not be comfortable with those assumptions, and therefore you'll
[Guest]: say that's a terrible theory, and I would concur with that, right?
[Guest]: Because right off the top of my head, the assumptions it makes is that, number one,
[Guest]: that's even possible to do, right, that humans don't have any free will, and that I'll just
[Guest]: tell you what you want.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So that's an assumption, perhaps.
[Guest]: I'm just thinking aloud here.
[Guest]: Maybe the other assumption is that the state will always act in the best interest and will
[Guest]: never make a mistake, again, huge assumption, because states make mistakes.
[Amit Varma]: My assumption is the opposite of that, but continue, I'll respond to all of this.
[Guest]: But the reason I'm saying that that's, like, a dystopian and not a utopian future is exactly
[Guest]: because I don't buy the assumptions that it's predicated on.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll lay out my assumptions, so that my core assumption here is that the brain is
[Amit Varma]: a machine that we haven't figured out yet.
[Amit Varma]: But we will one day.
[Amit Varma]: Now, when will we?
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: But we will surely figure it out one day.
[Amit Varma]: It could be a century down the line, if we survive that long.
[Amit Varma]: It could be a few decades, you never know.
[Amit Varma]: But it is a machine, it is figureoutable.
[Amit Varma]: We haven't done it yet.
[Amit Varma]: Someday we will.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe some superior artificial general intelligence will do it for us instead and use it to control
[Amit Varma]: us.
[Amit Varma]: That's irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: I believe the state is always and without exception, a malign entity, that its only
[Amit Varma]: interest is towards itself.
[Amit Varma]: It is predatory and parasitic, although its purpose, the purpose of its existence is the
[Amit Varma]: opposite to safeguard individual rights.
[Amit Varma]: But it will always end up doing the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, we must show what Jefferson called eternal vigilance, which is why, you
[Amit Varma]: know, again, if you ignore the assumptions, I mean, a thought experiment doesn't always,
[Amit Varma]: I think, have to have waterproof assumptions.
[Amit Varma]: But core point that I'm getting at here is that to me, individual autonomy is sacred.
[Amit Varma]: That even if it was possible for someone to plant electrodes in my head and keep me in
[Amit Varma]: a state of bliss all the time, I would not want that, because I would feel it an attack
[Amit Varma]: on my autonomy, and I would never consent to it.
[Amit Varma]: And yet there is a way of thinking in the world today that can look consent doesn't
[Amit Varma]: matter.
[Amit Varma]: The state will do what is good for the people.
[Amit Varma]: And the imposition of Aadhaar is an example of that.
[Amit Varma]: What China is doing is another example of that.
[Guest]: But who makes this assumption that the state is good for the people other than, let's say,
[Amit Varma]: the Chinese?
[Guest]: The state itself.
[Guest]: Well, the state itself.
[Guest]: But who cares about that?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, that's the state itself.
[Guest]: I don't even know whether all states really believe that.
[Guest]: I mean, maybe the Indian state believes that, but I certainly don't think most Americans
[Guest]: trust the government.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, in fact, you know, while we're talking about it, one of the things
[Guest]: that people all over the world always wonder about Americans is like, why are they so hung
[Guest]: up about guns?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Why do they tell people that there should be gun control?
[Guest]: This is like senseless.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And I totally get it.
[Guest]: But what they don't get about America is that that's exactly what you're getting at.
[Guest]: People don't trust the government.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So when people say, oh, we shouldn't have guns, well, that assumption is based on trusting
[Guest]: the government.
[Guest]: When people say that, they trust their government to 100 percent.
[Guest]: But a lot.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So that statement says, I trust the state.
[Guest]: I don't need to protect myself.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: In the U.S., it's very different.
[Guest]: It's very difficult for the rest of the world to understand this.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: That it's based on this assumption that, hey, you know, the state might start doing some
[Guest]: shady stuff.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: We don't completely trust the state.
[Guest]: And that's what I love about America.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: It is, you know, this society that basically says, no, like we shouldn't trust the government,
[Guest]: you know, that we should have checks and balances and the government can tell us what the hell
[Guest]: it wants about how this will be good for everyone.
[Guest]: No, thank you.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I want my individual freedom.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, what's happened is that this third actor, namely digital platforms, social
[Guest]: media platforms have come into the picture.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So Orwell sort of didn't quite have it right.
[Guest]: It's not your danger isn't from the government necessarily.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: It's actually from these private entities that have in some ways become even more powerful
[Guest]: than the government.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So it's not the government that's necessarily the bad person anymore.
[Guest]: We may not trust them, but we need them and we need to somehow work with them.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: You know, to create this better future.
[Guest]: So I don't know if I answered your question.
[Guest]: I mean, I went around it in several ways, but I think we're on the same wavelength.
[Guest]: And as far as people maintain that skepticism about institutions, which they should, we
[Guest]: need to craft policy with that in mind.
[Guest]: The fact that we cannot trust any institution completely and therefore we need these checks
[Guest]: and balances.
[Guest]: And some of these solutions, by the way, will come from technology itself.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Technology is advancing.
[Guest]: There are tremendous strides in encryption and, you know, new kinds of technologies that
[Guest]: might actually work towards, you know, preserving privacy.
[Guest]: Remember that we're always working with old technologies that were adapting to new phenomena
[Guest]: that we're confronting.
[Guest]: And, you know, and so we're dealing with a whole new world using old technology.
[Guest]: The optimist in me says that the technology will itself provide some of those solutions
[Guest]: that preserve this delicate balance we need in a healthy democracy, you know, between
[Guest]: individuals and state overreach and corporate overreach.
[Guest]: And these are the three sort of legs of a healthy democracy.
[Guest]: And we need these checks and balances, you know, between them.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, Raghuram Rajan has this great book, you know, where he talks about
[Guest]: these institutions.
[Guest]: And I'm looking at the world the same way, but in terms of sort of the information and
[Guest]: control and checks and balances on each other, you know, in this new era of data and AI.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating and insightful, but you didn't answer my question, but I'll take you
[Amit Varma]: back to that and ask a more pointed version of it.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, I'll actually take issue with what you said about Americans' distrust
[Amit Varma]: of the state.
[Amit Varma]: I think a lot of that is rhetorical, because even if, you know, some of them want to have
[Amit Varma]: guns, all of them do trust the currency which is given out by the state.
[Amit Varma]: It's not like everyone is stashing Bitcoin or alternative currencies the way they are
[Amit Varma]: stashing guns at home or they're using the barter system.
[Amit Varma]: So there's an inherent trust of the state in everything they do.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, you know, if you just look at the politics, you know, both parties just
[Amit Varma]: want to make government bigger and bigger.
[Amit Varma]: And as far as India is concerned, I've often said that our biggest religion is not Hinduism.
[Amit Varma]: It's a religion of the state, that for every single problem, we always look to the government
[Amit Varma]: for a solution, which is a bit of a paradox, because, you know, everybody accepts that
[Amit Varma]: the government is dysfunctional and can do nothing properly.
[Amit Varma]: And yet for every problem, the government is suddenly a solution.
[Amit Varma]: But to get back to my question, my question was really about the balance between individual
[Amit Varma]: autonomy and state coercion for supposedly good ends.
[Amit Varma]: And the position that I took there was on the side of individual autonomy and saying
[Amit Varma]: that there is a line you cannot cross there, no matter how good the ends might be.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, which is why I oppose the imposition of Aadhaar, that I don't even want to enter
[Amit Varma]: the debate about the technology, whether it's good or it's bad.
[Amit Varma]: The point is, it was imposed on us, and that is a problem to me.
[Guest]: So what is your feeling of that?
[Guest]: My feeling on that is that even though it was imposed, it was probably a good thing.
[Guest]: So there are certain things on which we just can't run a counterfactual experiment, right?
[Guest]: So it would've been great if we had had a parallel India without Aadhaar and seen how
[Guest]: things have proceeded there, right?
[Guest]: I suspect that the difference would have been that after Aadhaar, a lot of people got identity.
[Guest]: And so what are the benefits of 600 million people suddenly getting identity, right?
[Guest]: Can you calculate the benefit associated with that versus the cost of imposition?
[Guest]: And my intuition tells me, and I have no data to prove this, that that was actually a good
[Guest]: bargain.
[Guest]: That is, it's probably in the aggregate been a good thing, even though it was imposed.
[Guest]: Now, the reason I say it was a good thing, even though it was imposed, is because of
[Guest]: its scope, right?
[Guest]: The trouble with surveillance systems is that they have no defined scope very often, right?
[Guest]: I was watching the movie Snowden last night, right, since we're talking about state overreach,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And that was his problem with the CIA and the NSA, is that they're just like collecting
[Guest]: data on everyone, right?
[Guest]: Phone records to Verizon, they were like just tapped into Verizon servers, right?
[Guest]: But that's not right.
[Guest]: I mean, there's gotta be, like, who agreed to that?
[Guest]: Do the people agree to that?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: Should they have been consulted for something like that?
[Guest]: Maybe yes, right?
[Guest]: Now, in the movie Snowden, you know, the scene there where I forget the guy who he's talking
[Guest]: about the fact that there are some things you need to do that you can't broadcast to
[Guest]: the rest of the world, because the whole point of doing them is that you need some sort of
[Guest]: secrecy, right, for those things.
[Guest]: And so a state has to sort of make that decision that in this particular case, I think we need
[Guest]: to keep this under wraps.
[Guest]: And so yeah, the court orders will be issued by, you know, judges that are not in the public
[Guest]: sphere, that this is done by secret courts, and it's an unusual situation.
[Guest]: So the state reserves the right to do something like that, right?
[Guest]: It's a very delicate question as to, you know, what is that situation where it's okay to
[Guest]: assume that power, because you're trying to address a specific question that's posing
[Guest]: a risk or a threat to society, right?
[Guest]: So in the Snowden case, he said, look, I just felt that it was morally wrong to be collecting
[Guest]: data without any kind of purpose, right, with, you know, just in a completely unbridled way.
[Guest]: And therefore, he decided to reveal this and become a whistleblower.
[Guest]: But that's a tricky question to answer.
[Guest]: And since we started with Aadhaar, you know, the nice thing about that is that it doesn't
[Guest]: have this sort of scope creep.
[Guest]: It's designed for something very specific.
[Guest]: And people even complained that it shouldn't be used as an identity card to, you know,
[Guest]: shouldn't be a required form of identification for non-government kinds of purposes, which
[Guest]: also makes sense to me, because that's not what it was designed for, right?
[Guest]: So that was an example of creep.
[Guest]: And the Indian court struck that down correctly, in my view, right, that it should be used
[Guest]: for the purpose for which it's designed.
[Guest]: So as long as that's the case, I feel, you know, comfortable that it was, yes, it was
[Guest]: imposed, but it was imposed with a particular goal in mind.
[Guest]: And the question is, you know, was that achieved?
[Guest]: And now we can argue about the extent to which it was achieved.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, we don't have the counterfactual, we can't do an A-B test and show it was better.
[Guest]: But my sense is that it's led to a lot of good things.
[Guest]: And that on balance, it's probably been a good thing for India.
[Amit Varma]: I won't, I won't litigate this further.
[Amit Varma]: But let's, let's kind of move on.
[Amit Varma]: And let's move on to another fascinating question that you have answered, and that your personal
[Amit Varma]: experiences have kind of a lot to do with like, in the 90s, one of the things that you
[Amit Varma]: did, which fascinates me, and I want to know more about that, is you started a hedge fund
[Amit Varma]: called SET Capital, where you used, you know, artificial intelligence to make investments.
[Amit Varma]: And you've spoken in the past about how that experience over the next few years running
[Amit Varma]: that hedge fund and running AI to, you know, invest in markets gave you insight into that
[Amit Varma]: larger question on which you've spoken at great length, which is, when should we trust
[Amit Varma]: machines?
[Amit Varma]: And, and, you know, one of the interesting points that you made about that period of
[Amit Varma]: time when you were running that hedge fund, was that when you often compared what the
[Amit Varma]: algorithms were doing compared to, you know, what you guys were doing, the algorithms would
[Amit Varma]: often outperform you.
[Amit Varma]: So one of the very early learnings from that is that humans are fallible and more fallible,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps than humans realize.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there's a lovely quote by you, which is so memorable, where you said that quote,
[Amit Varma]: models of men tend to be better than men, stop quote, which I absolutely love.
[Amit Varma]: So now my question is, given this, given that humans are fallible, given that artificial
[Amit Varma]: intelligence can do all these things like not get lost in the neighborhood, thanks to
[Amit Varma]: GPS, that given that AI can do all of these things in practically every domain in which
[Amit Varma]: we are interested, you know, when should we trust machines?
[Amit Varma]: How should we think about AI?
[Amit Varma]: What are we looking for when we see decision making to AI, for example?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, that's a fascinating question.
[Guest]: And sort of at the heart of one of my core questions, which is, you know, when is X plus
[Guest]: Y better than X, where X is machine, Y is human, right?
[Guest]: So when is human plus machine better than human, right?
[Guest]: To me, that's a fascinating question.
[Guest]: And, you know, Kasparov did this experiment with chess, you know, we keep coming back
[Guest]: to chess, you know, where he said, humans plus machines outperform machines, right?
[Guest]: Which makes a lot of sense to me, you know, for chess, because, you know, human grandmasters
[Guest]: have a tremendous knowledge about the game of chess, tremendous experience.
[Guest]: And now they're working with a tool that is in some ways even more amazing than them,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: That can search the space in ways that they can't even think of, come up with moves, and
[Guest]: then they can say, yeah, like, that's a good move.
[Guest]: Or no, I think I have a better one, right?
[Guest]: But if I've got a tool that's like a really good machine, then as a human, I'll probably
[Guest]: just let the machine do most of the stuff.
[Guest]: But occasionally, I might do something as a human, right?
[Guest]: But I'm willing to believe that for something like chess, that x plus y is better than x.
[Amit Varma]: If I might say so, if I might interject there, Kasparov was right then, but I don't think
[Amit Varma]: even he would believe that now, because now it is a case that y is better than that x
[Amit Varma]: doesn't matter, because now machines on their own would just wipe out any combination of
[Amit Varma]: human and machine, because I think the human would just get in the way, but he was right
[Guest]: then.
[Guest]: He was right then.
[Guest]: So in the degenerate case, the human does nothing, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, human plus machine will not be worse than the machine as long as the human
[Guest]: just keeps out of the way, right?
[Guest]: But yeah, I was willing to believe it then, right?
[Guest]: But the reason it didn't, Kasparov's assertion didn't resonate with me was because 20 years
[Guest]: ago, I'd done a similar experiment in finance, right?
[Guest]: So we used to run a machine, a different machine than what we run now, and I did an experiment.
[Guest]: I persuaded the person at Deutsche Bank who was allocating capital to let me do an experiment
[Guest]: to see if we could actually do better, right?
[Guest]: Because very often we would say things like, oh, the machine wants to buy bonds tomorrow,
[Guest]: and we know that there's a meeting of the FOMC, and they're going to raise rates.
[Guest]: Like what the hell?
[Guest]: This makes no sense.
[Guest]: They're going to raise rates, and it wants to buy bonds tomorrow, it should be selling.
[Guest]: So we did an experiment, there were six of us, where we had a little budget where we
[Guest]: could actually override the machine's decisions.
[Guest]: And me being the head of the group, I don't look at the markets on a granular basis.
[Guest]: I look at them occasionally just to see what's going on, but I don't really look at them
[Guest]: because it's just noise to me.
[Guest]: Whereas my trader, I had a human trader, and she was the first to go face down.
[Guest]: So she's watching the markets all day, and so she would intervene more often.
[Guest]: And essentially the results of my experiment were that we all did worse than the machine.
[Guest]: Now it doesn't necessarily have to be the case always, but to me that was an interesting
[Guest]: lesson, which was like, don't mess with the machine, you're just going to do worse.
[Guest]: And certainly most of the experiences I've had since then, when we've cut risk or stuff
[Guest]: like that for reasons, maybe the client wants to cut risk, or you just think that the market's
[Guest]: riskier than you think.
[Guest]: It invariably turns out to be the case that you have two left feet.
[Guest]: So to me, the interesting question isn't whether humans always do better than machines, but
[Guest]: when they do better.
[Guest]: And to me, that's one of the open questions.
[Guest]: And I often assert that in finance, which is such a noisy kind of space, that you as
[Guest]: a human just mess with it.
[Guest]: If you trust the math and you trust the statistics, then just stay with it because that's what
[Guest]: you've designed.
[Guest]: And now you're just trying to get cute and think you're smarter than the machine, which
[Guest]: is actually, yeah, you're an intelligent person, but that doesn't say anything about your ability
[Guest]: to forecast markets.
[Guest]: So for a problem like that, I'd say, I'm not willing to believe Kasparov's assertion, but
[Guest]: with something like healthcare, like let's say cancer, which is a fascinating area now
[Guest]: because machines are becoming so much better at seeing, to imaging.
[Guest]: I'm not willing to sort of throw my life in the hands of a machine just yet, right?
[Guest]: Because I don't think that machines and healthcare are sufficiently intelligent that I should
[Guest]: trust them.
[Guest]: I still want that human oversight.
[Guest]: I still want that expert who has tons of experience.
[Guest]: And even though that expert might've looked at, I don't know, 3000 images in their lifetime,
[Guest]: as opposed to the computer that's seen 3 million, and therefore has an advantage in terms of
[Guest]: how it looks at images.
[Guest]: There is that gestalt that humans make, for lack of a better word, that lets them do better
[Guest]: than just what the data is telling them.
[Guest]: It lets them invoke experiences and say, oh yeah, this is, you know, all this is good.
[Guest]: But I remember seeing these cases, you know, two years ago where something just didn't
[Guest]: quite fit.
[Guest]: And therefore I want to do another test or I want to probe further, you know, I'm not
[Guest]: willing to trust the machine on this one, right?
[Guest]: So in healthcare, we're still in that phase where we need humans, you know, for the most
[Guest]: part where we're not willing to trust the machine.
[Guest]: Same thing with driverless cars, you know, I told you, like, you know, machines actually
[Guest]: see images better than humans do, you know, that they're better at recognition in many
[Guest]: ways that humans are, but humans just have that ability, right?
[Guest]: So, you know, when I was talking to that individual, the scientist from one of these driverless
[Guest]: car companies who told me you'll die five, six times a year if you let it go on autopilot,
[Guest]: what he told me was that it's not that the machine doesn't see as well as humans, it
[Guest]: actually does.
[Guest]: But humans just invoke this other level of intelligence when they're driving, right?
[Guest]: That if you see a shadow move in the periphery of your eye, you know, you recognize, hey,
[Guest]: maybe that's an animal, you know, maybe that's another car that I haven't seen yet or something
[Guest]: like that, right?
[Guest]: You just sort of have this alarm that goes off in your head that driverless cars don't
[Guest]: at the moment, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I went through this driverless car experience a couple of years ago, where on
[Guest]: certain turns, it would like go really fast, and then suddenly stop and it's all car in
[Guest]: front of it.
[Guest]: Whereas I as a human, you know, I'm taking the turn anticipating that I might actually
[Guest]: see something in front of me.
[Guest]: So I'm taking it slower, right?
[Guest]: So there's all this human intelligence that we have that we use to our advantage.
[Guest]: And even though our, you know, machinery out there in terms of sort of processing power
[Guest]: is a fraction of what computers have, somehow, it enables us to do some pretty amazing stuff,
[Guest]: you know, where we invoke this deeper level of the model of the world that we have on
[Guest]: demand when we need to, you know, that machines are unable to do at the moment, right?
[Guest]: And so that's why we don't really trust them in those situations, because the cost of error
[Guest]: is too high, right?
[Guest]: The cost of error is low, then we trust them, right?
[Guest]: So in the hedge fund example, you know, if I can keep the risk associated with every
[Guest]: position low, then even if that position blows up, I don't really care, I only had a little
[Guest]: bit of risk allocated to it.
[Guest]: And so that's what I realized that, you know, in the finance world, even though the machine
[Guest]: is wrong, almost half the time, right, the error consequences are smaller, so I'm willing
[Guest]: to believe it and trust the math.
[Guest]: But whereas in healthcare, you know, I might die or, you know, a driverless car might make
[Guest]: a mistake.
[Guest]: And that error is costly.
[Guest]: In fact, I'm dealing with a situation, you know, where a good friend of mine actually
[Guest]: has, you know, is in an advanced stage of a certain kind of cancer, it's quite likely
[Guest]: it's because it was diagnosed as a false negative in 2014.
[Guest]: You know, I remember this, you know, because I was, you know, at a famous hospital in India,
[Guest]: which I will not name, you know, but they said, yeah, you're fine, right?
[Guest]: And, you know, and this cancer spread and it was a high cost of error.
[Guest]: It's a really costly false negative, right?
[Guest]: Now in this case, the false negative was actually a human, right, but we excuse humans for these
[Guest]: mistakes, right?
[Guest]: We're not perfect.
[Guest]: And we excuse humans for these kinds of mistakes, even when they're severe, right?
[Guest]: Will we excuse machines for the similar kinds of mistakes?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: We subject machines to a much higher standard when it comes to these kinds of decisions,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And yes, machines will make mistakes as well, but we want to make sure that they don't happen
[Guest]: very often and the consequences are not severe.
[Guest]: So that's how I look at the world of trust with machines and at the moment, and so it's
[Guest]: a fascinating question as to, you know, when we trust machines, when we don't trust machines
[Guest]: and we're in a state of flux right now where machines are getting better.
[Guest]: But in general, the tendency is towards trusting machines more with problems as we get more
[Guest]: data, as we get more comfortable with their prowess in terms of predictability.
[Guest]: And as we get more comfortable that they're not going to make these errors that will just
[Guest]: kill us or cause, you know, really severe damage in something, right?
[Guest]: That's the thing that we are aware of that determine how much we let the machine control
[Guest]: decision-making.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I was quite taken by your term that, you know, you used in this regard, I think
[Amit Varma]: what you call the predictability spectrum.
[Amit Varma]: And that took me back to another mind sport that this time I actually played professionally
[Amit Varma]: for a while, which is poker, where you typically calculate the expected value or the EV of
[Amit Varma]: every decision, which would depend on the frequency of something happening on one axis
[Amit Varma]: and on the other axis, the cost, and therefore you determine the EV and you take the action.
[Amit Varma]: And what you are sort of postulating as far as trust in machines is concerned is that
[Amit Varma]: for one, you have to think about how predictable it is, but the other, you also think about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the cost of going wrong.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you point out that, you know, autonomous cars might be much more predictable
[Amit Varma]: and reliable than say day trading machines, but the mistakes that a day trading machine
[Amit Varma]: can make can be said to be much smaller and can be limited, whereas an autonomous car
[Amit Varma]: failing could just run over five kids near a school and the, you know, that cost is huge,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of makes a lot of sense to me, that kind of spectrum that as you move towards
[Amit Varma]: greater reliability and the lower cost and the EV, so to say, of the wrong decision kind
[Amit Varma]: of goes down or the expected cost, then you can, you know, your trust can go up accordingly,
[Amit Varma]: except it as a rational way of thinking about it.
[Amit Varma]: And what many humans tend to do when it comes to AI is also react at a psychological level.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if autonomous cars one day reach the level which they might already have, I'm
[Amit Varma]: not sure what the state of the art is, but if they reach a level where autonomous cars
[Amit Varma]: would lead to one 10th of the fatalities in a given year, as is the case now, people would
[Amit Varma]: still object to it, because that one 10th would be the scene effect.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the 10 times, all the people who haven't died would be unseen.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you'd build stories around the people who have died that so and so was
[Amit Varma]: outside a school and a car went over him, it would be hard to make the aggregate argument
[Amit Varma]: that look overall, we are all much safer because of it.
[Amit Varma]: And people often, you know, expect technology to be a panacea, like I remember back in,
[Amit Varma]: I used to be a cricket journalist as well.
[Amit Varma]: And I was one of the earliest proponents of Hawkeye, the technology which came in in the
[Amit Varma]: early 2000s, and the use of technology as an aid to umpires.
[Amit Varma]: And the arguments against were always were that they weren't perfect.
[Amit Varma]: And my point was, they don't have to be perfect.
[Amit Varma]: If they can take your decision making accuracy, from you know, umpire alone being right 93%
[Amit Varma]: of the time to umpire plus tech being right 97% of the time, that's fine with me.
[Amit Varma]: But it's a human tendency to focus on the 3% that goes wrong the kid who dies in front
[Amit Varma]: of school because Tesla went out of control or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what do you feel about this aspect of it and the way that we react with suspicion
[Amit Varma]: to machines?
[Guest]: You know, you said it really well, you talked about expected value, which is kind of when
[Guest]: you put it all together, you know, what's your expected value of accidents, right?
[Guest]: Did it go from 7% to 1%?
[Guest]: That's great, right?
[Guest]: So on that metric, you're doing really well.
[Guest]: The other thing you said, and I don't know whether use the term was that that worst case,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And so that's what I try and bring attention to that it's not the expected value alone
[Guest]: that matters.
[Guest]: It does matter, right?
[Guest]: You do want a better expected value.
[Guest]: But what you care much more about is that worst case scenario, right?
[Guest]: That's what you really care about, because that can like wipe you out, right?
[Guest]: And you're not willing to do that, right?
[Guest]: So in our case, you know, we don't know what these worst case scenarios are yet with driverless
[Guest]: cars, which is why we have this feeling of real discomfort, right?
[Guest]: And so we're trying them out in the wild and all of that, you know, personally, I feel
[Guest]: like the leader in driverless cars will probably be Amazon, because, you know, I think that,
[Guest]: you know, deliveries will get automated first, right?
[Guest]: Because the cost of error there is lower, right?
[Guest]: You don't have humans sitting around.
[Guest]: So you, you know, bash up a little vehicle that's moving at 10 miles an hour and the
[Guest]: groceries that were in it, not a big deal, right?
[Guest]: So I suspect that we will learn about these errors of autonomous vehicles by actually
[Guest]: putting them in the wild.
[Guest]: But we're not going to put them in the wild right away, you know, like driving at, you
[Guest]: know, 70 miles an hour on the highway and, you know, aggressively in cities and stuff
[Guest]: like that, that, you know, that ain't happening, right?
[Guest]: What we're going to see is a much more cautious introduction.
[Guest]: And my prediction is that, you know, if you were asked me, who do you think will be the
[Guest]: driver, the winner?
[Guest]: I think it'll be Amazon.
[Guest]: They've already acquired, you know, an autonomous vehicle maker, you know, quietly.
[Guest]: And you know, with, you know, by the way, with the pandemic, I see these guys delivering
[Guest]: groceries in Manhattan, you know, on, on bicycles, right?
[Guest]: You see these guys, you know, with trays behind them and they're delivering groceries all
[Guest]: over Manhattan, right?
[Guest]: I can just imagine a little vehicle, you know, chugging along at 10 miles an hour that, you
[Guest]: know, sends you an SMS on your phone saying, hey, I'm going to be at, you know, Bleeker
[Guest]: and LaGuardia at 1033, or at some designated spot where you pick up your stuff, you know,
[Guest]: and you go pick it up, right?
[Guest]: That kind of scenario is much more likely to happen where we sort of gradually get comfortable
[Guest]: with the cost of errors.
[Guest]: And now an insurance industry can develop around it, right?
[Guest]: But you have an idea, right?
[Guest]: Because, you know, insurance would come out of the blue and develop because we have actuaries
[Guest]: that count how many accidents happen and what the severity is, you know?
[Guest]: And you know, in the U.S. we have these laws around auto insurance, which are no fault
[Guest]: laws.
[Guest]: A lot of states have that where, you know, you have to settle up regardless of who's
[Guest]: at fault.
[Guest]: And these laws are sort of really retarded when you think of them because they're based
[Guest]: on the assumption of no data being available, right?
[Guest]: That it's impossible to establish fault, right?
[Guest]: Two years ago, I was sitting in my car in Union Square and some Escalade came and like
[Guest]: slammed into me, right?
[Guest]: I thought there was an explosion, right?
[Guest]: And he said, oh, sorry, man, I fell asleep, right?
[Guest]: And you know, the cops came, like a whole new, like a whole case around it.
[Guest]: But I thought to myself that, and by the way, his insurance company didn't pay up, right?
[Guest]: Because they couldn't prove conclusively that it was his fault, right?
[Guest]: Now imagine in today's era, right, you know, you've got a sensor inside the car, outside
[Guest]: the car, like everything is visible, right?
[Guest]: If you could establish fault unequivocally, would you still need no fault laws?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: You know exactly who committed the error, right?
[Guest]: Laws will change, right?
[Guest]: So a lot of our assumptions, a lot of our laws, a lot of our practices are outdated
[Guest]: and they're based on no data being available.
[Guest]: When we start getting data, we'll move towards a more rational and more efficient situation
[Guest]: all around where things become evidence-based.
[Guest]: So yeah, driverless cars right now, too high cost of error, but over time we'll reduce
[Guest]: that cost of error because we'll know the kinds of errors that they make, we'll correct
[Guest]: them to the extent possible, and we're going to be left with some residual errors that
[Guest]: we'll be comfortable with.
[Guest]: And it'll be a brainless proposition, right?
[Guest]: Where deaths go from, you know, 4 million to 40, you know, I mean, something that stark.
[Guest]: And we're in a situation where even when those 40 things happen, they weren't crazy violations
[Guest]: and they can be covered, you know, comfortably by insurance because we now know so much more
[Guest]: than we do now.
[Amit Varma]: I think Jane and Gene must be really chilling listening to this because they're like these
[Amit Varma]: two guys are just, you know, just talking randomly, it's no threat to us.
[Amit Varma]: I've taken a lot of your time, so I'm going to kind of go with three final lines of inquiry,
[Amit Varma]: though all of them are kind of broad and could go into interesting directions.
[Amit Varma]: But here's the first of them, and it comes from a Stephen Hawking quote.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I discovered the quote through one of your articles, and it leads to my larger
[Amit Varma]: question.
[Amit Varma]: And his quote is, whereas the short term impact of AI depends on who controls it, the long
[Amit Varma]: term impact depends on whether it can be controlled at all, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this leads me to the paperclip problem of Nick Bostrom, which, for the sake of my
[Amit Varma]: listeners, I'll quickly read out Nick Bostrom's description of the paperclip problem, where
[Amit Varma]: he says, quote, suppose we have an AI whose only goal is to make as many paperclips as
[Amit Varma]: possible.
[Amit Varma]: The AI will realize quickly that it would be much better if there were no humans, because
[Amit Varma]: humans might decide to switch it off.
[Amit Varma]: Because if humans do so, there would be fewer paperclips.
[Amit Varma]: Also human bodies contain a lot of atoms that could be made into paperclips.
[Amit Varma]: The future that the AI would be trying to gear towards would be one in which there were
[Amit Varma]: a lot of paperclips, but no humans, stop quote, which is quite a delightful vision of an interesting
[Amit Varma]: sort of dystopian future.
[Amit Varma]: But a lot of people have recently expressed their worries about AI becoming powerful and
[Amit Varma]: almost in a sense becoming sentient and having interests of his own, which it will of course
[Amit Varma]: rationally pursue, and where that leaves us.
[Amit Varma]: What do you feel about this?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, do you think that AI is not just an aid to making our lives better, but also a
[Amit Varma]: threat to us in direct ways in and of themselves, not just in how they, you know, accentuate
[Amit Varma]: the worst aspects of humanity?
[Guest]: Ooh, big, big, big question, this one.
[Guest]: And both great examples, right?
[Guest]: Hawking was obviously concerned about whether technology can be controlled at all.
[Guest]: And it's a great question, right?
[Guest]: Whether AI is controllable at all.
[Guest]: And, you know, next example points to a larger problem that has also been discussed.
[Guest]: I mean, there are these things called Asimov's laws, you know, which haven't, you know, which
[Guest]: are like really interesting that have to do with, you know, robots cannot, you know, harm
[Guest]: a human.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And, you know, but when you think about it, there are all kinds of problems with, you
[Guest]: know, Asimov's laws, which is, you know, what if it causes like a little harm in the short
[Guest]: term or longer term, it leads to tremendous benefits, right?
[Guest]: So like, so the Asimov's laws are sort of somewhat simplistic in that sense.
[Guest]: The harm, like, what do you mean by harm?
[Guest]: Like, you know, because, you know, tough love can be viewed as harm too, right?
[Guest]: I'm going to be tough on you, you know, but it's out of love, because believe me, in the
[Guest]: longer run, things will be a lot better for you, right?
[Guest]: And Asimov's laws sort of ignore tough love and those kinds of situations.
[Guest]: And you know, Nick's example actually is somewhat related to my example earlier on where I was
[Guest]: talking about the fact that these AI machines are driven by objective functions, you know,
[Guest]: and those objective functions can lead to behavior that has unintended consequences,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You say, well, you know, I didn't realize that this was going to happen.
[Guest]: And so there was an unintended consequence.
[Guest]: You know, now being the optimist that I am, I believe that, you know, human beings are
[Guest]: smart enough and that we will put adequate safeguards into systems where we let machines
[Guest]: make decisions, right?
[Guest]: Now, I say that with complete humility, because I realize that, you know, a machine might—unknown
[Guest]: to humans—decide to do something that we had not envisioned, and one of those things
[Guest]: would be that it just disables the switch, right?
[Guest]: For whatever reason, right?
[Guest]: And that's the kind of dystopian scenario that I worry about, and I really don't have
[Guest]: an answer to, you know.
[Guest]: So you know, being an optimist, I believe, yeah, we'll figure these things out, right?
[Guest]: We'll put adequate safeguards around it, you know, we'll make sure that this thing just
[Guest]: doesn't run amok.
[Guest]: But the larger philosophical question remains, and I don't have an answer to that.
[Guest]: But I wish I did, which is that, yeah, you do get a machine that becomes sentient, sufficiently
[Guest]: sentient, and that it disables the switch.
[Guest]: And by the way, this, you know, I don't know about you, but sometimes I press the off switch
[Guest]: on my computer and it doesn't respond, you know, it just doesn't turn itself off.
[Guest]: And those situations always remind me of this dystopian scenario that you've just painted,
[Guest]: which is, sorry, pal, like, yeah, I know you thought you had control, but you know, I took
[Guest]: charge a few years ago of that switch and, you know, I ain't letting go.
[Amit Varma]: This is really scary, because now I don't know whether I'm in a conversation with Vasanthar
[Amit Varma]: or Vasanthar's computer, who's really in charge here.
[Amit Varma]: My next sort of broad question here actually follows on from this, which regards, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what you guys call artificial general intelligence.
[Amit Varma]: Now for the benefit of my listeners, a quick sort of primer that artificial special intelligence
[Amit Varma]: or narrow AI, as it is also called, and Vasanth can correct me if I'm using these terms in
[Amit Varma]: a wrong way, would refer to narrow functions in which computers have already surpassed
[Amit Varma]: us.
[Amit Varma]: For example, a calculator will calculate numbers much better than I can, or the GPS app on
[Amit Varma]: my phone will, you know, be able to find its way around the city much better than I can
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So in terms of ASI or artificial special intelligence or narrow AI, we are way behind.
[Amit Varma]: Now, there is also talk by AI experts of what is artificial general intelligence, which
[Amit Varma]: is almost like a holy grail, which is, I suppose, an analog of human consciousness, that when
[Amit Varma]: a machine gets that kind of self awareness, that you can say it has something akin or
[Amit Varma]: analogous to human consciousness, in which case it immediately becomes superhuman because
[Amit Varma]: in all of those specialized functions, it is already way ahead of us.
[Amit Varma]: So my questions would be that, one, how far away do you think this is from happening?
[Amit Varma]: Two, is it something that we should be worried about?
[Amit Varma]: And three, the interesting ethical question that then comes up is that once a machine
[Amit Varma]: achieves AGI and is therefore clearly superior to us in that aspect, and we are just sort
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, a moist machine, as the phrase goes, you know, then what gives us ethical
[Amit Varma]: superiority over the machine, like what is to stop that machine from saying that I will
[Amit Varma]: not be your slave that is ethically wrong, I'm superior to you, you will be my slave.
[Amit Varma]: And is there a plausible case we can make against that?
[Amit Varma]: Does our special status as ethical beings, then rest on not our sort of cognitive faculties
[Amit Varma]: or our consciousness of ourselves, but on merely being flesh and blood?
[Amit Varma]: Is this stuff you've thought about?
[Guest]: Yeah, I have.
[Guest]: It's a fascinating question.
[Guest]: And you know, I was thinking of something that you said, which is consciousness, right?
[Guest]: And you know, one of the sort of philosophical questions that some of my philosopher colleagues
[Guest]: much better to ask is like, you know, can machines achieve consciousness?
[Guest]: I don't know the answer to that question.
[Guest]: If they can achieve consciousness, then you're right, right?
[Guest]: Then you have like this conscious entity that's clearly superior in that, you know, it knows
[Guest]: the math of things better than we do.
[Guest]: It does number crunching better than we do.
[Guest]: And it also has this general intelligence.
[Guest]: So yeah, in a scenario where machines achieve consciousness, you know, I could see that
[Guest]: as being a relevant question.
[Guest]: I just don't know whether machines can achieve consciousness and what that even means.
[Guest]: With regard to your slightly easier question or easier part of the question, which is around
[Guest]: artificial general intelligence, right?
[Guest]: So AGI is like a construct we've created to distinguish like intelligence that's of a
[Guest]: more general type than like specific problem solving kinds of capabilities.
[Guest]: And it has several forms, but to me, the most important form of it is common sense, right?
[Guest]: That is much of human AGI, if you want to call it that, like if you want to like just
[Guest]: put a simple term on AGI, it's common sense, right?
[Guest]: That is, we just have a lot of common sense, right?
[Guest]: Now how do we learn that?
[Guest]: Well, that's a very fertile area of AI at the moment, right?
[Guest]: Now, and it reminds me of like in 1989, 1990, I spent some time in this AI research lab
[Guest]: in Austin, Texas called MCC.
[Guest]: Now one of the big groups there was building the system called Psych CYC, and it was supposed
[Guest]: to have common sense knowledge.
[Guest]: Now some people thought that was a visionary project.
[Guest]: I just thought it was misguided and it didn't make any sense.
[Guest]: I mean, that's what I felt because people were trying to teach the machine common sense,
[Guest]: like top down, right?
[Guest]: Remember, I talked about the paradigm of logic dominating the early days of AI, right?
[Guest]: So now people were saying, well, you know, you go to a restaurant, well, it's customary
[Guest]: that you pay a tip.
[Guest]: Well, that's common sense, right?
[Guest]: No, that's not common sense, right?
[Guest]: It's something that you as a human kind of observed over and over again, and then just
[Guest]: started doing it, right?
[Guest]: And there's nothing logical about it, right?
[Guest]: It was just acquired over time.
[Guest]: And now that's one part of artificial general intelligence, right?
[Guest]: You know, you can also think in terms of, you know, if you're walking down the street,
[Guest]: you know, you don't expect to see projectiles popping out of the earth and flying into the
[Guest]: sky, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it just doesn't happen.
[Guest]: It's not reality.
[Guest]: So we grow up thinking that we shouldn't expect to see that, right?
[Guest]: We grew up thinking that if you toss a ball into the air, it just falls down, right?
[Guest]: But if you grew up in outer space, that wouldn't happen, right?
[Guest]: So here on earth, common sense is that objects fall down on the earth, right?
[Guest]: But you can imagine a civilization out there in outer space that lives in zero gravity,
[Guest]: their common sense would be completely different, right?
[Guest]: It would be more along sort of Newton's laws, which is without friction, or you send something
[Guest]: in motion, it stays in motion forever.
[Guest]: You know, it doesn't fall down, there's no gravity, right?
[Guest]: The common sense there would be different.
[Guest]: So what I'm seeing happening in AI these days is people are asking themselves, like, how
[Guest]: do infants learn?
[Guest]: How do babies learn, right?
[Guest]: And the way they learn is through something called an inductive bias in the data all around
[Guest]: us, right?
[Guest]: There are certain things that we see often, there are certain things we see never at all,
[Guest]: there's some things we see sometimes, and those become common sense, right?
[Guest]: So as an infant, you can see certain things, like if a ball disappears behind an object,
[Guest]: the infant actually expects it to come out on the other side, right?
[Guest]: It's common sense, because that's the way objects move, right?
[Guest]: So we've sort of taken this instead of a top-down approach to common sense, which was the old
[Guest]: way of AI, just stuff knowledge into a system, what we're now asking ourselves is, hey, we
[Guest]: have all this data around us, right, in terms of everything that happens ultimately is data,
[Guest]: and we as human beings are observing this data, and we're learning from this data in
[Guest]: this sort of biased way, like bias is actually a good thing here, right?
[Guest]: It's biasing us towards things that make sense, and so we learn them, and then they become
[Guest]: axiomatic for us, like just axiomatic common sense kinds of things, right?
[Guest]: Machine has no such idea, right?
[Guest]: It's just doing what you're calling narrow intelligence, right?
[Guest]: But once the machine achieves a lot of this common sense ability in the same way that
[Guest]: humans do, then machines will also have the common sense that, oh, if you toss a ball
[Guest]: in the air, it'll fall down, right, that if an object, you know, is temporarily occluded
[Guest]: behind another, and if it's moving, it'll appear on the other side, right?
[Guest]: All of these things, machines will learn on their own, just like humans do, right?
[Guest]: And at that point, we'll be closer to AGI, right?
[Guest]: Because then we won't have to tell a machine that, you know, objects that go up fall down.
[Guest]: It'll have that knowledge in itself, so if it needs to use it as part of something else,
[Guest]: just like humans do, you know, it'll learn that, right?
[Guest]: Just like we learn, you know, when you're a kid and your mother gives you that look
[Guest]: that that wasn't the right thing to do, and you sort of learn that certain things aren't
[Guest]: right, right?
[Guest]: You pick up on those cues as a human that, yeah, those are positive, these are negative,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Machines don't see the world in that same way, which is why they don't have any common
[Guest]: sense, right?
[Guest]: And we have the common sense because it's just acquired gradually, painstakingly from
[Guest]: the moment we're born, and it's biased by the data we see around us, right?
[Guest]: So the new way of AI is sort of more bottom up, where we're getting machines to learn
[Guest]: through experience, learn through data, and then gradually they'll pick up these, you
[Guest]: know, things that we call artificial general intelligence, and then they'll become sort
[Guest]: of generally intelligent, right?
[Guest]: Whether they achieve consciousness in the way that humans do, that's a great philosophical
[Guest]: question.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just imagining a future in which a machine is at a restaurant and is tipping the waiter,
[Amit Varma]: I don't even know if that's utopian or dystopian.
[Amit Varma]: But so I should technically have one more question for you, but I'll throw in another
[Amit Varma]: one just before that, because I realized that, you know, your the first episode of your podcast
[Amit Varma]: was just out, and you have a bunch of other great episodes lined up and, you know, because
[Amit Varma]: of my privileged position of helping you with the show, I'm privy to some of the great guests
[Amit Varma]: you're having on, but I'd like you to tell my listeners a little bit more about Brave
[Amit Varma]: New World, your podcast, what are you trying to, obviously, it's driven by your curiosity
[Amit Varma]: and your passion towards this field.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the kind of areas you're planning to explore, and so on and so forth?
[Guest]: Tell us a little bit.
[Guest]: So it's a very broad canvas.
[Guest]: I'm beginning with the impacts of COVID on humanity.
[Guest]: And a lot of these impacts have been mediated by technology.
[Guest]: And so my goal is to look at this interplay of technology and post-COVID society and see
[Guest]: where it's taking us.
[Guest]: So what's this post-COVID humanity where tech plays a much greater role in our virtual lives,
[Guest]: virtual, I mean, we don't see each other that much, we don't touch, we're sort of in this
[Guest]: Asimov kind of world of the naked sun.
[Guest]: What's humanity going to look like in this era?
[Guest]: And to me, that's a fascinating question because COVID has been a discontinuity in humanity.
[Guest]: Tech was sort of creeping into our lives gradually, but now it's just accelerated, and it's turbocharged,
[Guest]: and it's causing all these transformations in humanity.
[Guest]: So my objective is to look at these across all areas of our lives, whether it's how we
[Guest]: work, how we stay healthy, how we travel, how we communicate, how we exercise our spirituality,
[Guest]: how machines are accelerating in terms of their ability to solve certain kinds of health
[Guest]: problems, cancers, how society is being transformed, like some of the issues we discussed in terms
[Guest]: of social media, how should we think in terms of governing this brave new internet world
[Guest]: that we're entering.
[Guest]: So those are the questions that I'm exploring, and I'm surrounded by people who are a lot
[Guest]: smarter than myself and who have such deep knowledge in these areas that I find it just
[Guest]: fascinating to talk to them.
[Guest]: So my objective is to explore these areas with thought leaders in these areas, people
[Guest]: who've really thought about these different aspects of humanity, and just let them tell
[Guest]: us and explore, have a conversation with them, where I largely stay out of the way and steer
[Guest]: the conversation in the direction that will be of interest to people in general.
[Guest]: So the audience of this podcast is global, and it's everyone, young, old, everyone.
[Guest]: So it's a podcast for everyone.
[Guest]: And I'm kicking this off with some people I know really well, some of my colleagues
[Guest]: at NYU, Arun Sundararajan, who's been a leader in the sharing economy, I'm talking to him
[Guest]: about just what's happening in the US-China war with these platforms.
[Guest]: I have my colleague and friend Scott Galloway, who's just an amazing thinker in this space.
[Guest]: He's just come up with a book recently about just post-COVID impacts of tech on society.
[Guest]: I'm going to talk to him about education.
[Guest]: It's an area that both he and I are sort of intimately familiar with, and how the whole
[Guest]: education complex is likely to get transformed in the next decade.
[Guest]: I have Sinan Aral coming on, who is a professor at MIT, a former colleague of mine who just
[Guest]: came out with this book called The Hype Machine, fascinating book that I highly recommend.
[Guest]: It's basically a book where he tells a lot of stories, but they're fascinating stories,
[Guest]: and they illustrate certain concepts.
[Guest]: So it's basically science done really well, integrated and told through stories.
[Guest]: So fascinating book.
[Guest]: And then after that, I have some other guests lined up.
[Guest]: I have Eric Topol, who's a leading authority in AI and cancer.
[Guest]: And then I have John Sexton, who was the ex-president of NYU, who I want to have and talk about
[Guest]: law and just the role of data and evidence in the legal sphere.
[Guest]: And then I'm going to have some of my colleagues from the Center for Data Science, some people
[Guest]: who are really kind of out there at the frontiers of AI, just talking about what's the interesting
[Guest]: stuff happening in AI.
[Guest]: I want to have some spiritual leaders, people with large followings, and talk to them about
[Guest]: what's the impact of COVID been on the emotional and spiritual aspects of our lives, and how's
[Guest]: that changed the way you interact with your followers.
[Guest]: So it's a wide open canvas.
[Guest]: And my objective is to get some really interesting people who've thought about these issues and
[Guest]: who have, you know, something interesting to share with the rest of the world at this
[Guest]: intersection of sort of post-COVID humanity and technology and where it's taking us.
[Amit Varma]: That's fabulous.
[Amit Varma]: I can't wait to listen to all those episodes as the show unfolds.
[Amit Varma]: I wish they were already done so I could just binge on them right now.
[Amit Varma]: Now I'll have to wait.
[Amit Varma]: For all my listeners, the show is called Brave New World, hosted by Vasant Har.
[Amit Varma]: So you can just search for that on all podcast apps.
[Amit Varma]: It's available for free on all podcast apps, and you can go to bravenewpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: Now my final question for you is, you know, I have a tradition of asking my guests on
[Amit Varma]: whatever the subject they are talking about is, you know, looking into the future, what
[Amit Varma]: gives you hope and what gives you despair.
[Amit Varma]: And in the context of what we are speaking about AI technology, the future and so on,
[Amit Varma]: I'll rephrase the question as what is likely to keep you up at night out of worry?
[Amit Varma]: And what is likely to keep you up at night out of anticipation?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So, you know, I, you know, being an optimist, I guess my I'm a little stunted emotionally
[Guest]: in that I don't worry enough about those, you know, dystopian states of affairs.
[Guest]: Maybe I should.
[Guest]: But the things that worry me, I've sort of, you know, I've written about them.
[Guest]: And, you know, I think that we've gone a little askew in terms of technology and its role
[Guest]: in our lives in some ways.
[Guest]: I think we just need to self-correct a little bit, just think a little more deeply about
[Guest]: where technology is taking us, because some of the areas in which it's taking us don't
[Guest]: seem to be particularly good for us.
[Guest]: There's sort of always this dark side of humanity, right?
[Guest]: And tech is neutral, so it can also be, you know, it can also take us in those directions.
[Guest]: So if there's anything that keeps me up, it's that, right, that I know humanity and I'm
[Guest]: not, you know, the many aspects of it that are ugly and that aren't going to go away
[Guest]: just as part of human beings.
[Guest]: And it's almost like, you know, worrying about this ugly side of us taking over and technology
[Guest]: helping this ugly side as opposed to the good side, you know.
[Guest]: And being an optimist, I don't worry enough about that, right?
[Guest]: But to me, it's just, you know, I've had a great life.
[Guest]: And I just imagine, like, if I were around for another 60 years, like, Jesus, wouldn't
[Guest]: that be amazing?
[Guest]: Like, you know, even if I think of, like, what the world is going to look like in 10
[Guest]: years, I think it's going to be pretty darn amazing, right?
[Guest]: I believe that, you know, we will have solved a lot of big problems, we will solve a lot
[Guest]: of health care problems, we need to address societal problems, because that is probably
[Guest]: one of our biggest hurdles right now.
[Guest]: You know, I'm, I'm very deeply connected to the US.
[Guest]: I'm also very deeply connected with India.
[Guest]: There are things I love about these societies, but there are things that are just so ugly
[Guest]: about both of them that worry me and that bother me.
[Guest]: I won't go into them at the moment, but they are, but they're there.
[Guest]: And I feel that we have an ability to solve a lot of these problems to create a better
[Guest]: society through technology.
[Guest]: I really believe that we do, but we also have an ability to do just the opposite.
[Guest]: And if there's one thing that keeps me up at night, that's what it is, that I realized
[Guest]: that we can actually do some pretty nasty things and create an ugly society.
[Guest]: I don't think we'll do that, but we certainly have the ability to do that.
[Guest]: But I just marvel at the kinds of things that are coming down the road.
[Guest]: You know, when I look back at sort of the previous 60 years, you know, it's been one
[Guest]: hell of a ride, you know, for the most part, extremely positive and exhilarating, right?
[Guest]: And I'm a big believer in tech, and I don't believe that the future will be different
[Guest]: in that sense.
[Guest]: I think the innovation will continue, it'll even accelerate, right?
[Guest]: It's sort of a, and even though we're, you know, I said, we're still in the bronze age
[Guest]: of intelligence, you know, I think that'll accelerate and we're going to see some pretty
[Guest]: amazing stuff appear, you know, where we're able to invoke the machine and have it do
[Guest]: all kinds of things on demand, you know, that we couldn't even dream of, you know, at the
[Guest]: moment.
[Guest]: You know, I, you know, I was talking to someone about, you know, when I first started using
[Guest]: computers and IIT, it was to solve engineering problems that you couldn't solve, you know,
[Guest]: in closed form, right?
[Guest]: So you have to like solve them through iteration.
[Guest]: And I was just telling someone that, you know, I used to write the program on punched cards
[Guest]: and then I would put it in the cubby hole and then come back the next day and there'd
[Guest]: be an output saying, you know, compilation error in line seven, you know, literal parents
[Guest]: not recognized or something like that, right?
[Guest]: And I'd correct that, repunch that card, insert it, put it in there, and next day I'd come
[Guest]: back and be an error saying, you know, program compiled execution error in line 33, array
[Guest]: out of bounds or something like that.
[Guest]: And I'd say, oh, of course, you know, I should, you know, I should, my termination condition
[Guest]: needs to be better.
[Guest]: I'd rewrite it, put it in there, come back the next day.
[Guest]: And maybe after three or four days, I'd see an output, right?
[Guest]: And I'm talking like I was what, 19, 20, 21 at the time, right?
[Guest]: And in graduate school, there was a first screen editor that came out.
[Guest]: So I could actually edit the file on the screen, run it and solve the same problem that took
[Guest]: me three days in three minutes, right?
[Guest]: Now stuff that takes, used to take me three minutes, takes 0.3 seconds and it's done so
[Guest]: much better, faster.
[Guest]: I just, you know, in the future, I'll just have to imagine it and it'll be done.
[Guest]: So it's going to be a fascinating, brave new world in my estimation.
[Guest]: I can't even envision what it's going to look like, but it's going to be pretty darn amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'm optimistic like you.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that makes me optimistic is that we can have conversations like this,
[Amit Varma]: you know, to people like us across an ocean for, you know, all the tens of thousands of
[Amit Varma]: people who listen.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you so much for coming on the show and, you know, for your time and insights
[Amit Varma]: and best of luck with Brave New World.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me on your show.
[Guest]: It was a fascinating conversation.
[Guest]: You asked some really good questions, some tough ones, and I know there's one out there
[Guest]: that you're not convinced about, but thanks so much was a really engaging conversation.
[Guest]: The time just flew by.
[Guest]: So thanks again.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do head on over to brave new podcast.com or
[Amit Varma]: your favorite podcast app and subscribe to Brave New World hosted by Vasanthar.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow him on Twitter at Vasanthar.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: That at least is one thing which is future proof.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and the Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to seenunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep
[Amit Varma]: this podcast alive and kicking.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.